An Approach for Alert Raising
in Real-Time Data Warehouses
Maximiliano Ariel López∗, Sergi Nadal∗∗,
Mahfoud Djedaini∗∗∗, Patrick Marcel∗∗∗, Verónika Peralta∗∗∗, Pedro Furtado∗∗∗∗
∗École Centrale Paris, maxilopez@economicas.uba.ar,
∗∗Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, snadal@essi.upc.edu
∗∗∗Université de Tours, firstname.lastname@univ-tours.fr
∗∗∗∗University of Coimbra, pnf@dei.uc.pt
Abstract. This work proposes an approach for alert raising within a real-time
data warehouse environment. It is based on the calculation of confidence inter-
vals for measures from historical facts. As new facts arrive to the data warehouse
on a real-time basis, they are systematically compared with their appropriate
confidence intervals and alerts are raised when anomalies are detected. The in-
terest of this approach is illustrated using the particular real world use case of
technical analysis of stock data.
1 Introduction
Traditional data warehousing architectures assume offline periods in order to run the costly
ETL processes that move and transform data coming from operational sources. Currently,
many organisations have the requirement of analysing their information in a real-time manner.
For instance, in the stock markets domain, technical analysis allows modelling market be-
haviour and predicting tendencies. Monitoring markets and quickly detecting deviations from
the expected behaviour allow analysts to face abrupt changes. Other domains where real-time
analysis is desirable include energy production, traffic and network monitoring.
In most cases, the aforementioned requirement cannot be satisfied with the classic data
warehouse and ETL architectures. To enable near real-time analysis based on the most re-
cent information, data warehouse architectures have been extended or adapted (Ferreira and
Furtado, 2013; Ferreira et al., 2013; Waas et al., 2013; Jörg and Dessloch, 2009; Santos and
Bernardino, 2008). In such systems, how data is loaded and the frequency in which this pro-
cess is executed change. In (Ferreira and Furtado, 2013), an integrated architecture is proposed,
which implements a real-time data warehouse without data duplication. It is composed of three
main components: the Dynamic Data Warehouse (D-DW), the Static Data Warehouse (S-DW)
and the Merger, with additional components providing real-time ETL. The main idea is to load
new data into the D-DW, an in-memory database that holds the most recent information and
provides fast integration. On the other side, the largest volume of historical data is stored in
the S-DW. Integration between D-DW and S-DW is done through classical offline procedures.
After this integration is done, the D-DW is emptied. Queries are handled by the Merger com-
- 145 -
