  
Data mining for activity extraction  
in video data 
 
JoseLuis PATINO, Etienne CORVEE 
François BREMOND, Monique THONNAT 
 
INRIA, 2004 route des Lucioles, 06902 Sophia Antipolis (FRANCE) 
{jlpatino, Etienne.Corvee, Francois.Bremond, Monique.Thonnat}@sophia.inria.fr 
http://www-sop.inria.fr/orion/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Summary. The exploration of large video data is a task which is now possible 
because of the advances made on object detection and tracking. Data mining 
techniques such as clustering are typically employed. Such techniques have 
mainly been applied for segmentation/indexation of video but knowledge ex-
traction of the activity contained in the video has been only partially addressed. 
In this paper we present how video information is processed with the ultimate 
aim to achieve knowledge discovery of people activity in the video. First, ob-
jects of interest are detected in real time. Then, in an off-line process, we aim 
to perform knowledge discovery at two stages: 1) finding the main trajectory 
patterns of people in the video. 2) finding patterns of interaction between peo-
ple and contextual objects in the scene. An agglomerative hierarchical cluster-
ing is employed at each stage. We present results obtained on real videos of the 
Torino metro (Italy). 
 
1 Introduction 
Nowadays, more than ever, the technical and scientific progress requires human operators 
to handle more and more quantities of data. To treat this huge amount of data, most of the 
work can now be performed in the data-mining field to synthesize, analyze and extract valu-
able information, which is generally hidden in the raw data. Clustering is one of the most 
commonly used techniques in data mining to perform knowledge discovery tasks on large 
amount of data with no prior knowledge of what could be hidden in the data. There exists 
many clustering techniques in the literature, and the main goal of all these techniques is to 
obtain a partition of the data by organizing it automatically into separate groups where the 
objects inside a specific group are more similar to each other (with regards to their extracted 
and measured attributes, or variables) than to the objects of the other groups. Mining of text 
documents (Blatak 2005; Lemoine et al., 2005; Xing et Ah-Hwee 2005) and web-related 
