Enhancing Personal File Retrieval in Semantic File Systems 
with Tag-Based Context  
 
Hung Ba Ngo1,2, Frédérique Silber-Chaussumier1, Christian Bac1 
 
Institut National des Télécommunications-France1, Cantho University-Vietnam2 
{hung.ngo_ba, frederique.silber-chaussumier, christian.bac}@int-edu.eu 
 
Abstract. Recently, tagging systems are widely used on the Internet. On 
desktops, tags are also supported by some semantic file systems and desktop 
search tools. In this paper, we focus on personal tag organization to enhance 
personal file retrieval. Our approach is based on the notion of context. A 
context is a set of tags assigned to a file by a user. Based on tag popularity and 
relationships between tags, our proposed algorithm creates a hierarchy of 
contexts on which a user can navigate to retrieve files in an effective manner. 
 
1 Introduction 
Nowadays, tagging systems such as (Delicious) are widely used on the Internet. These 
tagging systems enable users to add keywords (or tags) to Internet resources without relying 
on a controlled vocabulary. On the desktop, tags are also supported by some semantic file 
systems and desktop search tools. Users in LFS (Padioleau, 2005), for example, can 
manually assign tags to a Jpeg file to annotate the names of persons in that photo for later 
retrieval. With tags, users are flexible in describing their opinions and interests on files (or 
resources). As a result, users’ personal files are classified per tags and each user has a 
personal vocabulary of tags. Users then can retrieve files using logical expressions of tags. 
By default, tagging systems are more suitable for file retrieval using querying than browsing. 
However, experiments in personal information management (Barreau et al., 1995), and 
(Khoo et al., 2007) show that most users prefer browsing than querying (logical search) as 
retrieving their files from a desktop. That is the reason why recently tagging systems such as 
Delicious on web or LFS (Padioleau, 2005) and TagFS (Bloehdorn et al., 2006) on desktop 
concentrate on tag organization to help users to browse tags for file retrieval. We continue to 
enhance personal file retrieval in tagging systems with context-based searching. A context in 
our approach is a set of tags assigned to a file (or resource) by a user. Based on tag 
popularity and relationships between tags, our proposed algorithm creates a hierarchy of 
contexts on which a user can navigate to retrieve files in an effective manner. In this paper, 
we first present the interesting techniques for tag organization in section 2; introduce tag-
based context and how to enhance tagging systems with context-based searching in section 3. 
Our algorithm for creating a Directed Acyclic Graph of Tags (DAGoT) based on tag 
popularity and relationship of tags is in section 4. This DAGoT is used to organize contexts 
into a hierarchical structure so that we can enhance personal file retrieval with context-based 
searching. An implementation and experimental results using real data are presented in 
section 5. Our conclusion and perspectives are in the last section. 
