Mining Implications from Lattices of Closed Trees
José L. Balcázar∗, Albert Bifet∗, Antoni Lozano ∗
∗ Departament de Llenguatges i Sistemes Informàtics
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya
{balqui,abifet,antoni}@lsi.upc.edu
Abstract. We propose a way of extracting high-confidence association rules
from datasets consisting of unlabeled trees. The antecedents are obtained through
a computation akin to a hypergraph transversal, whereas the consequents follow
from an application of the closure operators on unlabeled trees developed in pre-
vious recent works of the authors. We discuss in more detail the case of rules
that always hold, independently of the dataset, since these are more complex
than in itemsets due to the fact that we are no longer working on a lattice.
1 Introduction
In the field of data mining, one of the major notions contributing to the success of the area
has been that of association rules. Many studies of various types have provided a great advance
of the human knowledge about these concepts. One particular family of studies is rooted on
the previous notions of formal concepts, Galois lattices, and implications, which correspond to
association rules of maximum confidence.
These notions have allowed for more efficient works and algorithmics by reducing the
computation of frequent sets, a major usual step towards association rules, to the computation
of so-called closed frequent sets, a faster computation of much more manageable output size,
yet losing no information at all with respect to frequent sets.
It was realized some time ago that the plain single-relational model for the data, as em-
ployed by the computation of either closed sets or association rules, whereas useful to a certain
extent, was a bit limited in its applicability by the fact that, often, real-life data have some sort
of internal structure that is lost in the transactional framework. Thus, studies of data mining in
combinatorial structures were undertaken, and considerable progress has been made in recent
years. Our work here is framed in that endeavor.
In previous work, we have proposed a mathematical clarification of the closure operator
underlying the notion of closed trees in datasets of trees; the closure operator no longer works
on single trees but on sets of them. In a sense, made precise there, closed trees do not constitute
a lattice. A mathematically precise replacement lattice can be defined, though, as demonstrated
in (Balcázar et al., 2006), consisting not anymore of trees but of sets of trees, and with the
peculiar property that, in all experiments with real-life data we have undertaken, they turn out
to be actually lattices of trees, in the sense that every closed set of trees was, in all practical
cases, a singleton.
