On-Line Analytical Processing on Graphs Generated
from Social Network Data
Lilia Hannachi∗, Omar Boussaid∗∗,
Nadjia Benblidia∗, Fadila Bentayeb∗∗
∗LRDSI Laboratory, University of Blida, Algeria
hannachi.lilia@yahoo.fr, Benblidia@yahoo.com
∗∗ERIC Laboratory, University of Lyon 2, France
Omar.Boussaid@univ-lyon2.fr, Fadila.Bentayeb@univ-lyon2.fr
Abstract. Social Network services have quickly become a powerful means by
which people share real-time messages. Typically, social networks are mod-
eled as large underlying graphs. Responding to this emerging trend, it becomes
critically important to interactively view and analyze this massive amount of
data from different perspectives and with multiple granularities. While On-
line analytical processing (OLAP) is a powerful primitive for structured data
analysis, it faces major challenges in manipulating this complex interconnect-
ing data. In this paper, we suggest a new data warehousing model, namely
Social Graph Cube to support OLAP technologies on multidimensional social
networks. Based on the proposed model we represent data as heterogeneous in-
formation graphs for more comprehensive illustration than the traditional OLAP
technology. Going beyond traditional OLAP operations, Social Graph Cube
proposes a new method that combines data mining area and OLAP operators to
navigate through dimension hierarchies. Experimental results show the effec-
tiveness of Social Graph Cube for decision-making.
1 Introduction
Business Intelligence (BI) represents a set of technologies and systems that play a major
role to delivers the right information extracted from large amounts of data for decision-making.
One of the most important technologies in BI is on-line analytical processing which represents
a very powerful and flexible tool to mine and analyze data deeply. Using operations such as
roll-up and drill-down, the result of OLAP is visualized as a data cube which allows decision
makers to analyze quickly and navigate through the data from different perspectives and with
multiple granularities. The multidimensional model used in OLAP supports handling of user
defined views of data.
Over the last few years, social network sites such as Twitter and Facebook have quickly be-
come a rich source of real time information by which people share short microblogs including
daily conversations, cultural trends and information news without any concern about writing
style, which make them able to exchange information about their personal point of views and
interests. This imposes new challenges in the social networks and the microblogging data
- 97 -
