Modern data analysis tools in personal financial services: a
quantitative revolution?
David J. Hand
Imperial College London
d.j.hand@imperial.ac.uk
Abstract. I argue that dramatic advances in methods and tools of data analysis
are having an equally dramatic effect on how decisions are made in the personal
financial services sector. A series of examples are given, and the sorts of tools
needed are described.
1 Introduction
The mathematical revolution in the financial market sector is now well established. Over
the past several decades it has become more and more advanced, employing legions of re-
searchers, predominantly mathematicians and physicists, who might otherwise have gone into
the academic world, and who have knowledge and skills of the types of mathematics needed
for the financial sector.
This revolution is rather unusual because it represents a direct link between advanced mathe-
matics and practical application: most applications of mathematics involve fairly straightfor-
ward and well established mathematics, even mathematics which is centuries old. In contrast,
the mathematics of financial markets, of options, futures, swaps, and other complex products
is cutting edge. Several journals catering for these advances have sprung up, and many books,
ranging from the introductory to the advanced have been written about this new area of appli-
cation of mathematics.
Broadly speaking, this area is concerned with managing risk at a macroscopic level. The risk
that a corporation’s share price will drop, that cold weather will damage the harvest, that a
hurricane will hit the Eastern seaboard of the USA, and so on. Of course, now that tools which
essentially allow one to bet on the future outcome of uncertain events have been developed
they have begun to be applied to a wide range of outcomes of other events. They are, after all,
essentially gambling instruments.
What has attracted less media interest, however, are the parallel changes which are beginning
to impact the personal financial services sector. Perhaps it is because most of these are con-
cerned with the micro level, the level of individual people, that they do not attract such interest.
Perhaps it is because the revolution is still at an early stage, and has not built up the momentum
of the derivatives market. Perhaps it is because there have been no vastly expensive disasters,
such as the LTCM fiasco, which have captured the public attention. Whatever the cause, the
- 1 - RNTI-A-1
