Context-based Exploitation of Data Warehouses
Yeow Wei Choong2, Arnaud Giacometti1, Dominique Laurent3,
Patrick Marcel1, Elsa Negre1, Nicolas Spyratos4
1LI, Université François Rabelais de Tours, Antenne Universitaire de Blois, France
2HELP University College, Kuala Lumpur - Malaysia,
3ETIS, Université de Cergy-Pontoise, France
4LRI, Université Paris-Sud, France
Abstract. An OLAP analysis can be defined as an interactive session during
which an user launches queries over a data warehouse. The launched queries
are often interdependent, and they can be either newly defined queries or they
can be existing ones that are browsed and reused. Moreover, in a collaborative
environment, queries may be shared among users. This notion of OLAP analysis
has never been formally defined. In this paper, we propose a clear definition of
this notion, by introducing a model for sharing, browsing and reusing OLAP
queries over a data warehouse.
1 Introduction
In the area of OLAP exploitation of data warehouses (what we call analysis), there is a need
for organizing, reusing, sharing queries, in order to simplify and speedup the querying process
[DKK05, GMN06]. Broadly speaking, it can be said that contextual information during the
exploitation of data warehouses must be taken into account. We propose a model that answers
these needs, by adapting the model proposed by Spyratos et al. in the context of collaborative
work [TACS02, AST03, AS04].
In this model, the user defines and stores OLAP queries in what is called a context. In a
context, the user can organize the queries so that they are easily browsed in a subsequent ses-
sion. This organisation can reflect e.g., classical query containment, or an order of importance
relevant to the user. In a multi-user environment, contexts can be shared among users. The set
of contexts can be browsed, or queried. In addition, OLAP queries in a given context can be
imported into another context to enrich the user’s current analysis.
The contribution of our work includes:
• A model for OLAP query organisation, which we called the Context Base, that allows to
easily share and reuse queries,
• The languages for defining, manipulating and browsing this context base,
• The exploitation of the structure of the context base to provide useful recommendations for
facilitating user browsing.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 motivates through an example the
need for a tool for sharing, browsing and reusing queries in a collaborative OLAP environment.
