Temporal Data Warehouses: Logical Models
and Querying
Waqas Ahmed∗, Esteban Zimányi∗, Robert Wrembel∗∗
∗Department of Computer and Decision Engineering (CoDE),
Université Libre de Bruxelles, Belgium
{waqas.ahmed, ezimanyi}@ulb.ac.be
∗∗Institute of Computing Science,
Poznan University of Technology, Poland
robert.wrembel@cs.put.poznan.pl
Abstract. Data warehouses (DWs) integrate data from multiple and heteroge-
neous data sources. Most of the DW design methods assume that the contents
of the dimensions in a DW will not change, but this is not the case in reality.
Therefore, DWs must reflect these changes in the real-world in order to enable
users to ask various types of temporal queries. Since temporal queries are com-
plex and costly, it is necessary to know which modeling approach is better for
such queries. In this paper, we discuss two possible approaches to implement a
DW capable of maintaining the history of the changes in dimension members.
We also present a classification of temporal queries that can be used to evaluate
the two approaches.
1 Introduction
A data darehouse (DW) integrates data from multiple, heterogeneous, and often distributed
external data sources (EDSs). Integrated data are then analyzed by means of multiple types
of analytical applications. Data stored in a DW are modeled as multidimensional cubes that
consist of facts and dimensions. A fact is a data item being analyzed. It includes numerical
features called measures that quantify the fact. Some examples of facts include sales, cash
withdrawals, and telephone calls. Facts are analyzed in the context of dimensions that typically
have a hierarchical structure. Some examples of dimensions include Customer, Time, and
Geography, the last one having a hierarchical structureCity→State→Country. The instances
of a dimension are called members. An example of a member of the Geography dimension is
Brussels→Brussels-Capital Region→Belgium.
An inherent feature of EDSs is that they change their content and structures over time.
Content changes result from daily business operations. Structural changes are a consequence
of the need to support new business requirements, using new technologies, and changes in the
legislation, to name a few. Both content and structural changes must be reflected in a DW. The
maintenance of the history of changes allows users to inquire about the state of the business
world at a given time. Moreover, for audit and accountability purposes, keeping an accurate
historical context is often a business requirement.
- 33 -
