 
 
Optimal histogram representation of large data sets: Fisher vs 
piecewise linear approximation. 
 
Antonio Irpino*, Elvira Romano** 
 
* Dipartimento di studi europei e mediterranei 
Seconda Università degli Studi di Napoli 
 Via del Setificio, 15 Complesso Monumentale Belvedere - San Leucio  
I-81020 Caserta (CE) 
irpino@unina.it 
** Dipartimento di Matematica e Statistica 
Universita' degli Studi di Napoli "Federico II" 
Via Cintia - Complesso Monte Sant'Angelo 
I-80126 Napoli 
elvrom@unina.it 
 
Summary. Histogram representation of a large set of data is a good way to 
summarize and visualize data and is frequently performed in order to optimize 
query estimation in DBMS. In this paper, we show the performance and the 
properties of two strategies for an optimal construction of histograms on a sin-
gle real valued descriptor on the base of a prior choice of the number of buck-
ets. The first one is based on the Fisher algorithm, while the second one is 
based on a geometrical procedure for the interpolation of the empirical distri-
bution function by a piecewise linear function. The goodness of fit is computed 
using the Wasserstein metric between distributions. We compare the proposed 
method performances against some existing ones on artificial and real datasets. 
1 Introduction  
Today’s storage information mechanism fails to capture a large amount of data and pre-
process them in their entirety, while only a summary is stored. In this context histogram plays 
the role of a tool for producing a suitable summarizing description and quickly answering to 
decision support queries. Following the guide phrase "An image says more than one hun-
dred words",  the histogram represents a simple and intuitive graphical tool to describe data 
distribution. It smoothes the data to display the general shape of an empirical distribution. The 
problem is that it can give a false impression of the shape of the dataset distribution, because 
its construction depends on the choice of the number and the length of the subintervals - usu-
ally called buckets or bins - of the real lines on which the histogram is based. Ideally it could 
have the situation in which for large bins the nature of the dataset is bimodal and for small 
bins the plot reduces to unimodal representation. The matter at stake here concerns the kind of 
bin width that can take into account the best graphical representation of the underlying DBMS 
and how it  can be  constructed with minimal error approximation. 
