A C-space sensitivity analysis of Earliest Deadline First
scheduling
Jean-François Hermant∗ and Laurent George∗
∗ECE/LACSC
53 rue de Grenelle
75007 Paris, France
{hermant, lgeorge}@ieee.org
Abstract. This paper presents a sensitivity analysis for the dimensioning of
real-time systems in which sporadic tasks are executed according to the preemp-
tive Earliest Deadline First (EDF) scheduling policy. The timeliness constraints
of the tasks are expressed in terms of late termination deadlines. A general case
is considered, where the task deadlines are independent of the task sporadicity
intervals (also called periods). New results for EDF are shown, which enable us
to determine the C-space feasibility domain, such that any task set with its worst-
case execution times in the C-space domain is feasible with EDF. We show that
the C-space domain is convex, a property that can be used to reduce the number
of inequalities characterizing the C-space domain.
1 Introduction
This paper considers the problem of correctly dimensioning real-time systems. The correct
dimensioning of a real-time system strongly depends on the determination of the task Worst-
Case Execution Times (WCETs). Based on the WCETs, a Feasibility Condition (FC) (1),
(10), (5) can be established to ensure that the timeliness constraints of all the tasks are always
met, regardless of their release times, when they are scheduled by either a fixed or a dynamic
priority-driven preemptive scheduling algorithm. The timeliness constraints are expressed in
terms of late termination deadlines imposed on the completion times of the tasks. The task
model is the classical sporadic model. A sporadic task set τ = {τ1, ..., τn} is composed of n
sporadic tasks, where a sporadic task τi is defined by:
• xi: its worst-case execution time (WCET).
• Ti: its minimum inter-arrival time (also called, by extension, the period).
• Di: its relative deadline (a task released at time t must be executed by its absolute
deadline t+Di).
In the sequel, we assume the general case where deadlines and periods are independent.
