Fault-Tolerance Analysis of Mixed CAN/Switched Ethernet
Architecture
Cláudia Betous-Almeida, Jean-Luc Scharbarg,
Christian Fraboul
IRIT-ENSEEIHT-University of Toulouse
2, Rue Charles Camichel
31000 Toulouse, France
claudia.betous,jean-luc.scharbarg, christian.fraboul@enseeiht.fr
Abstract. CAN is a well known fieldbus standard used in safety critical applica-
tions of embedded systems. However, steadily increasing amount of exchanged
information in such systems has led to the use of Switched Ethernet like solu-
tions. Mixed CAN/Switched Ethernet architectures allow to bypass CAN limita-
tions while preserving the widely used CAN technology. In order to use this kind
of architecture in safety critical applications a complete fault tolerance analysis
is mandatory. In this paper, we use a simulation-based fault-injection technique
to analyse the impact of different types of errors on the percentage of application
frames missing their deadlines. Results show that different types of errors don’t
have the same impact on different types of traffic. Moreover, it is shown that
the re-emission of corrupted frames can have a negative impact on the system’s
global performance.
1 Introduction
The Controller Area Network (ISO-CAN, 1993) is a well-known fieldbus standard that
provides a real-time performance with a fair reliability degree, at a very low cost. The growing
use of CAN in safety-critical real-time applications of embedded systems, such as automo-
tive or avionic ones, has led to concerns regarding the reliability evaluation of these systems.
Moreover, the amount of exchanged information in such systems has steadily increased over
the years and is now reaching the traditional fieldbusses’ limits, namely bandwidth limits.
So as to overcome those limits, Switched Ethernet like solutions are more and more envi-
sioned, for example in avionics systems with the AFDX (ARI, 2002), (Charara et al., 2006).
We have proposed a mixed CAN/Switched Ethernet architecture as an alternative between pure
CAN and pure Switched Ethernet architectures (Scharbarg et al., 2005b).
In order to successfully use this architecture in safety-critical applications, a complete fault-
tolerance analysis is needed. Fault-injection is the technique the most often used by system’s
designers in order to analyse the dynamic behaviour of the system, in the presence of faults.
This paper is an elaboration of the work presented in Betous-Almeida et al. (2006). In this
paper we present an overview of the different types of models and consequently different fault-
