New Worst-Case Response Time Analysis Technique For
Real-Time Transactions
Ahmed Rahni∗, Emmanuel Grolleau ∗
Michae¨l Richard∗
∗LISI/ENSMA
Téléport 2, 1 Av. Clément Ader
BP 40109, 86961 Futuroscope Chasseneuil Cedex
{rahnia,grolleau,richardm}@ensma.fr,
http://www.lisi.ensma.fr
Abstract. In this paper, we present a new worst-case response time analysis
technique for transactions scheduled by fixed priorities. In the general context
of tasks with offsets (general transactions), only exponential methods are known
to calculate the exact worst-case response time of a task. The known pseudo-
polynomial techniques give an upper bound of the worst-case response time.
The new analysis technique presented in this article gives a better (i.e. lower)
pseudo-polynomial upper bound of worst-case response time. The main idea of
this approach is to combine the principle of exact calculation and the principle
of approximation calculation, in order to decrease the pessimism of Worst-case
response time analysis, thus allowing to improve the upper bound of the response
time provided while preserving a pseudo-polynomial complexity.
1 Introduction
The Response-Time Analysis (RTA) (Audsley et al., 1995) is an essential analysis tech-
nique that can be used to perform schedulability tests (i.e. testing if tasks in a system will meet
their deadlines). Usually, the task model is an extension of the model of Liu and Layland (Liu
and Layland, 1973). The schedulability conditions obtained with the model of (Liu and Lay-
land, 1973) are however too pessimistic for certain kinds of pattern of tasks as tasks with offset
(Tindell, 1992, 1994), serial transactions (Traore et al., 2006a), reverse transactions (Traore
et al., 2006b), multiframe tasks (Mok and D.Chen, 1996) generalized multiframe tasks (Han
and Yan, 1997)(Baruah et al., 1999).
Tindell proposed in (Tindell, 1994) a new model of tasks with offset (transactions) extend-
ing the model of Liu and Layland (Liu and Layland, 1973). Transactions are non-concrete(the
transaction release times are not fixed a priori), thus the main problems is to determine the
worst case configuration for a task under analysis (its critical instant). Offset-Based response
time analysis of tasks scheduled under dynamic priorities EDF has been proposed in (Gutier-
rez and Harbour, 2003). In (Tindell, 1994, 1992) Tindell proposed an exact RTA technique
for transactions scheduled by a fixed priorities scheduler, this exact method has an exponen-
tial complexity and is intractable for realistic task systems; In (Tindell, 1994) Tindell has pro-
