OASIS formal approach for distributed
safety-critical real-time system design
Jean-Sylvain Camier, Damien Chabrol,
Vincent David, Christophe Aussaguès
CEA, LIST
BP 65, GIF SUR YVETTE CEDEX, F-91191 FRANCE
firstname.lastname@cea.fr
Abstract. OASIS provides an environment for real time multitasking and com-
munication design, as well as an execution environment based on a safety ori-
ented embedded real time kernel. The formal approach of real-time design
avoids many difficulties: it allows implementing efficient advanced real-time
functionalities without any safety loss. The concepts and methodology presented
in this paper ensure the most important safety properties. Within this framework,
our goal is to rely on formal and algebraic tools that can automatically bring the
proof of correctness for safety-critical design issues. Such a constructive ap-
proach can easily speed up the system development by the formalization of the
off-line analysis.
1 Introduction
In most key industries which require high dependability systems, distributed real time sys-
tems have found widespread use to ensure safety critical functions. In a distributed system,
consisting of several independent nodes communicating via a network, the architecture of the
communication network is the core of the system, and strongly conditions the capability of
the system to fulfill the real time and safety requirements (Shin, 1994). It is a major difficulty
to obtain a complete deterministic safety critical real time system conforming with very high
safety requirements and allowing both rigorous and flexible development, including verifica-
tion and validation. Providing these properties to a system has often been possible only by
the use of specific hardware. Our contribution leads to the definition of a constructive system
engineering approach that can deal with deterministic, fault-tolerant, safety critical real time
distributed architectures on standard hardware.
To prepare the next generation of sensitive systems or embedded systems in transport and
energy domains, our contribution is based on the OASIS approach developed by the CEA
(French Atomic Energy Commission) and AREVA-NP (Nuclear Power Firm), in cooperation
with EDF (Electricité de France). This approach provides rules and methods to design and
implement safety-critical real-time systems over single processor architecture (Aussaguès and
David, 1998). Work has been carried out to extend OASIS to distributed architectures. A
deterministic and real-time protocol based on TDMA and its optimized version, called A-
TDMA have been developed complying with the time-triggered context of OASIS.
