Qualitative Abstraction based Verification for Analog
Circuits
Mohamed H. Zaki∗, Sofiène Tahar∗, Guy Bois∗∗
∗Dept. of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Concordia University
Montreal, Quebec, H3G 1M8, Canada
{mzaki, tahar}@ece.concordia.ca
∗∗Genie Informatique, Ecole Polytechnique de Montreal
Montreal, Quebec, H3C 3A7 , Canada
guy.bois@polymtl.ca
Abstract. The verification of analog designs is a challenging and exhaustive
task that requires deep understanding of the physical behaviors. In this paper,
we propose a qualitative based predicate abstraction method for the verification
of a class of non-linear analog circuits. The method is based on combining
techniques from constraint solving and computer algebra along with symbolic
model checking. We have implemented the proposed verification algorithms
using the computer algebra system Mathematica and the SMV model checker.
1 Introduction
A cornerstone in embedded systems are analog designs, which are integrated circuits, re-
quired at the interfaces with the real world environment. Computer aided design (CAD) has
been under intense research during the past decades to overcome challenges in the design pro-
cess of analog designs. For verification purposes, simulation approaches are usually applied
to check that a design is robust with respect to different types of inaccuracies. However, with
designs growing in complexity, introducing more rigorous verification techniques, comple-
menting simulation is becoming of great importance.
Formal methods like model checking have been advocated for the verification of digital
designs where their correctness is proved mathematically against some formal properties. Mo-
tivated by the success of the application of formal methods in the verification of digital designs,
researchers started investigating the formal verification of analog designs. In analog designs,
one is interested in global properties connected to the dynamic behavior of the design. Un-
like its digital counterpart, analog designs verification is a challenging and exhaustive task
that requires deep understanding of their behavior. Challenging problems like non- linear ef-
fects make a direct application of formal methods very difficult and abstraction techniques are
required in order to achieve this task. Predicate abstraction is one of the most successful ab-
straction approaches developed in (8), for the verification of systems with infinite state space.
In this approach, the state space is divided into a finite set of regions and a set of rules is used
to build the transition between these regions in a way that the generated state transition sys-
tem can be verified using model checking. Among the proposed enhancements of predicate
