Using Analogy to Promote Conceptual 
Modeling Reuse 
Karin K. Breitman, Simone D.J. Barbosa, Marco A. Casanova,  
Antonio L. Furtado, Michael G. Hinchey  
Departamento de Informática – Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Rio de Janeiro 
Rua Marquês de S. Vicente, 225 – Rio de Janeiro, Brazil – CEP 22451-900 
{karin, simone, casanova, furtado}@inf.puc-rio.br, mike.hinchey@usa.net 
http://www.inf.puc-rio.br 
 
Abstract. This paper argues in favor of a database conceptual schema and Se-
mantic Web ontology design discipline that explores analogy mappings to re-
use the structure and integrity constraints of conceptual models, stored in a re-
pository. We presuppose that a team of expert conceptual designers would 
build a standard repository of source conceptual models, which less experi-
enced designers would use to create new target conceptual models in other 
domains. The target models will then borrow the structure and the integrity 
constraints from the source models by analogy. The concepts are expressed in 
the contexts of Description Logics, the RDF model and OWL to reinforce the 
basic principles and explore additional questions, such as the consistency of 
the target model. 
1 Introduction 
Metaphor is not merely a rhetorical device, characteristic of language alone. Lakoff and 
Johnson (1980) argue that “the human conceptual system is fundamentally metaphorical in 
nature. The essence of metaphor is understanding and experiencing one kind of thing in 
terms of another.” Holyoak and Thagard (1995, p. 220) argue that “metaphor uses the same 
mental processes as analogical thinking ... a metaphor is understood by finding an analogy 
mapping between the target domain (the topic of the metaphor) and the source domain. The 
degree to which an analogy is viewed as metaphorical will tend to increase the more remote 
the target and source domains are from each other.”  
In this paper, we claim that analogy mappings facilitate conceptual modeling by allowing 
the designer to reinterpret fragments of familiar conceptual models in other contexts. This 
may have applications in developing new versions of ground control systems or flight soft-
ware for a new spacecraft, for example.  Exploitation of such an approach requires a sound 
approach and a methodology to support conceptual modeling.   To that end, we propose a 
discipline for database conceptual schema design, and Semantic Web ontologies as well, that 
we call conceptual modeling by analogy and metaphor.  
The discipline is based on two simple ideas Breitman et al. (2007). First, a team of  expert 
conceptual designers would build a standard repository of source conceptual models that 
cover commonly found conceptual design patterns and that are expressed in familiar terms. 
The source conceptual models will naturally contain fully formalized integrity constraints, as 
defined by the conceptual design experts. For example, instead of a generic weak entity pat-
tern, the collection will contain a sample model of employees and their dependents, which is 
