Verification, Diagnosis and Adaptation: Tool-supported
enhancement of the model-driven verification process
Marco Bakera∗, Tiziana Margaria∗
Clemens D. Renner∗, Bernhard Steffen∗∗
∗University of Potsdam, D-14482 Potsdam, Germany,
{bakera, margaria, renner}@cs.uni-potsdam.de,
http://www.cs.uni-potsdam.de/sse
∗∗University of Dortmund, D-44227 Dortmund, Germany,
bernhard.steffen@cs.uni-dortmund.de,
http://ls5-www.cs.uni-dortmund.de
Abstract. In this paper, we use a case study from an autonomous aerospace con-
text as running example to show how to apply a game-based model-checking
approach a as a powerful technique for the verification, diagnosis and adapta-
tion of temporal properties. This work is part of our contribution within the
SHADOWS project, where we provide a number of enabling technologies for
model-driven self-healing. We propose here to use GEAR, a game-based model
checker for the full modal µ-calculus and derived, more user-oriented logics, as
a user friendly tool that can offer automatic proofs of critical properties of such
systems. Designers and engineers can interactively investigate automatically
generated winning strategies for the games, this way exploring the connection
between the property, the system, and the proof.1
1 Introduction
Software self-healing is an emerging approach to address the problem of fixing large, com-
plex software systems. Self-healing solutions presented to date commonly address a single
class of problems, or they are not applicable in fielded systems. To address the need for
industry-grade software self-healing, the SHADOWS EU project focuses on self-healing of
complex systems, extending the state-of-art in several ways (Shehory et al., 2007). It intro-
duces innovative technologies to enable self-healing of classes of problems not solved else-
where. It additionally integrates several self-healing technologies into a common solution. It
further adopts a model-based approach, where models of desired software behavior direct the
self-healing process. These allow for lifecycle support of self-healing applicable to industrial
systems.
We contribute to SHADOWS a number of enabling technologies for model-driven self-
healing. In this paper, we use a case study from an autonomous aerospace context as running
1This work has been partially supported by the European Union Specific Targeted Research Project SHADOWS
(IST-2006-35157), exploring a Self-Healing Approach to Designing cOmplex softWare Systems. The project’s web
page is at https://sysrun.haifa.ibm.com/shadows.
