  
Multi-source materialized views maintenance
1
 
 
Josep Silva, Jorge Belenguer, Matilde Celma  
 
Computer Science Department 
Technical University of Valencia 
Camino de Vera s/n 
E-46021 Valencia – Spain 
{jsilva, jorbefa, mcelma}@dsic.upv.es 
 
Abstract. In many information systems, the databases that make up the system 
are distributed in different modules or branch offices according to the require-
ments of the business enterprise. In these systems, it is often necessary to com-
bine the information of all the organisation's databases in order to perform 
analysis and make decisions about the global operation. This is the case of 
Data Warehouse Systems. From a conceptual point of view, a Data Warehouse 
can be considered as a set of materialized views which are defined in terms of 
the tables stored in one or more databases. These materialized views store his-
torical data that must be maintained in either real time or periodically by 
means of batch processes. During the maintenance process the systems must 
perform selections, projections, joins, etc. that can affect several databases. 
This is a complex problem since making a join among several tables requires 
(at least temporarily) having the information from these tables in the same 
place. This requires the Data Warehouse to store auxiliary materialized views 
that in many cases contain duplicated information. In this article, we study this 
problem, and we propose a method that minimizes the duplicated information 
in the auxiliary materialized views and also reduces the response time of the 
system. 
 
1 Introduction 
The use of Data Warehouse systems is becoming one of the critical factors that determine 
the success of many companies and organisations. The information gathered in the Ware-
house can be used to make decisions about the processes of the organization, and should 
therefore be consistent. The information should also be as up-to-date as possible. Having the 
information of the operational systems up-to-date makes the results of the queries carried out 
on the Warehouse Database to be closer to the reality of the organization. 
                                                
1
 This work has been partially supported by the EU (FEDER) and the Spanish MEC under 
grant TIN2005-09207-C03-02, by the ICT for EU-India Cross-Cultural Dissemination Pro-
ject ALA/95/23/2003/077-054, and by UPV under grant TAMAT. 
- 77 -
