Ontology Evolution and Source Autonomy in
Ontology-based Data Warehouses
Dung Nguyen Xuan∗ Ladjel Bellatreche∗ Guy Pierra ∗
∗ LISI/ENSMA - Poitiers University
1 Avenue Clément Ader 86960 Futuroscope - France
(nguyenx, bellatreche, pierra)@ensma.fr
Abstract. Ontology-based integration systems (OBIS) use ontologies in order
to describe the semantic of sources and to make the content explicit. Two major
architectures of OBISs are available: (i) those using an unique ontology, and (ii)
those using multiple ontologies. In the first architecture, all sources are related
to one shared ontology. This architecture suffers from changes of ontology and
sources which can affect the conceptualization of the domain represented in the
ontology. Any change in the ontology may affect the sources. Therefore, sources
are not really autonomous. In hybrid ontologies, each source is described by its
own ontology, called local ontology. Each one references/maps a shared on-
tology in order to guarantee that each source shares the same vocabulary. The
articulation between local ontologies and the shared ontology can be done either
a posteriori or a priori. Two major issues are raised in this architecture: (i) evo-
lution of the shared ontology and its consequence on the integrated system, and
(ii) autonomy of the ontology and the local schema of each source. In this pa-
per, we propose an approach and a model to manage asynchronous evolution of
warehouse integrated systems where the articulation is done in an a priori man-
ner. The fundamental hypothesis of our work, called principle of ontological
continuity, supposes that an evolution of an ontology does not make false an ax-
iom that was previously true. This principle allows to manage each old instance
using the actual ontology. Therefore, it simplifies significantly the management
of the evolution process and allows a complete automation of the whole inte-
gration process. Our work is motivated by the automatic integration of catalogs
of industrial components in engineering databases. It has been validated by a
prototype using ECCO environment and EXPRESS language.
1 Introduction
It is widely recognized that an automatic integration of heterogeneous data sources is one
of the keys to improve management and productivity of several application domains like data
warehouse, bio-informatic, e-commerce, etc. Generally, a data integration system combines
the data residing at different heterogeneous and autonomous sources, and provides an unified,
reconciled view of these data, called global schema, which can be queried by the users. A
- 55 -
