Biclustering of Gene Expression Data Based on Local
Nearness
Jesus S. Aguilar-Ruiz∗, Domingo Savio Rodriguez∗
Dan A. Simovici∗∗
∗BIGS BioInformatics Group Seville, University of Seville, Spain
dsavio@lsi.us.es,
∗∗Univ. of Massachusetts Boston, Massachusetts 02125, USA
dsim@cs.umb.edu
Abstract. The analysis of gene expression data in DNA chips is an important
tool used in genomic research whose main objectives range from the study of
the functionality of specific genes and their participation in biological process
to the reconstruction of diseases’s conditions and their subsequent prognosis.
Gene expression data are arranged in matrices where each gene corresponds to
one row and every column represents one specific experimental condition. The
biclustering techniques have the purpose of finding subsets of genes that show
similar activity patterns under a subset of conditions. Our approach consists of
a biclustering algorithm based on local nearness. The algorithm searches for
biclusters in a greedy fashion, starting with two–genes biclusters and including
as much as possible depending on a distance threshold which guarantees the
similarity of gene behaviors.
1 Introduction
The DNA Microarray technology represents a great opportunity of studying the genomic
information as a whole, so we can analyze the relations among thousands of genes simultane-
ously. The experiments carried out on genes under different conditions produce the expression
levels of their transcribed mRNA and this information is stored in DNA chips.
A bicluster is a subset of genes that show similar activity patterns under a subset of con-
ditions. The research on biclustering started in 1972 with Hartigan’s work, in which the way
of dividing a matrix in sub–matrices with the minimum variance was studied (Hartigan et al.,
1972). In that approach the perfect bicluster was the submatrix formed by constant values, i.e.,
with variance equal to zero. Hartigan’s algorithm, named direct clustering, divides the data
matrix into a certain number of biclusters, with the minimum variance value, so the fact of
finding a number of sub-matrices equal to the number of elements of the matrix is avoided.
Another way of searching biclusters is to measure the coherence between their genes and con-
ditions. Cheng & Church (Cheng et al., 2000) introduced a measure, themean squared residue
(MSR), that computes the similarity among the expression values within the bicluster. The
ideas of Cheng and Church were further developed by Yang (Yang et al., 2002, 2003) who
dealt with missing values in the matrices. As a result of this approach an algorithm named
- 681 - RNTI-E-6
