Maintaining an Online Bibliographical Database:
The Problem of Data Quality
Michael Ley∗, Patrick Reuther∗
∗Department for Databases and Information Systems, University of Trier, Germany
{ley,reuther}@uni-trier.de
http://dbis.uni-trier.de http://dblp.uni-trier.de
Abstract. CiteSeer and Google-Scholar are huge digital libraries which provide
access to (computer-)science publications. Both collections are operated like
specialized search engines, they crawl the web with little human intervention
and analyse the documents to classify them and to extract some metadata from
the full texts. On the other hand there are traditional bibliographic data bases
like INSPEC for engineering and PubMed for medicine. For the field of com-
puter science the DBLP service evolved from a small specialized bibliography
to a digital library covering most subfields of computer science. The collections
of the second group are maintained with massive human effort. On the long
term this investment is only justified if data quality of the manually maintained
collections remains much higher than that of the search engine style collections.
In this paper we discuss management and algorithmic issues of data quality. We
focus on the special problem of person names.
1 Introduction
In most scientific fields the amount of publications is growing exponentially. The primary
purpose of scientific publications is to document and communicate new insights and new re-
sults. On the personal level publishing is a sort of collecting credit points for the CV. On
the institutional level there is an increasing demand to evaluate scientists and departments by
bibliometric measures, which hopefully consider the quality of the work. All aspects require
reliable collection, organization and access to publications. In the age of paper this infrastruc-
ture was provided by publishers and libraries. The internet, however, enabled new players to
offer services. Consequently many specialized internet portals became important for scien-
tific communities. Search engines like Google(-Scholar) or CiteSeer, centralized archives like
arXic.org/CoRR and a huge number of personal and/or department web servers make it very
easy to communicate scientific material.
The old players — publishers, learned societies, libraries, database producers etc. —
face these new competitors by building large digital libraries like ScienceDirect (Elsevier),
SpringerLink, ACM Digital Library or Xplore (IEEE) in the field of computer science.
DBLP (Digital Bibliography & Library Project) (Ley, 2002) is an internet "newcomer"
that started service in 1993. The DBLP service evolved from a small bibliography special-
ized to database systems and logic programming to a digital library covering most subfields
- 5 - RNTI-E-6
