A reason why not to ban Null Hypothesis
Significance Tests
Bruno Lecoutre1, Jacques Poitevineau2, Marie-Paule Lecoutre3
1 ERIS, Laboratoire de Mathe´matiques Raphae¨l Salem
UMR 6085 C.N.R.S. et Universite´ de Rouen
Avenue de l’Universite´, BP 12, 76801 Saint-Etienne-du-Rouvray
bruno.lecoutre@univ-rouen.fr
Internet : http ://www.univ-rouen.fr/LMRS/Persopage/Lecoutre/Eris
2 ERIS, LAM/LCPE
UMR 7604, C.N.R.S., Universite´ de Paris 6 et Ministe`re de la Culture
11 rue de Lourmel, 75015 Paris
poitevin@ccr.jussieu.fr
3 ERIS, Laboratoire Psy.Co, E.A. 1780,
Universite´ de Rouen
UFR Psychologie, Sociologie, Sciences de l’Education
76821 Mont-Saint-Aignan Cedex
marie-paule.lecoutre@univ-rouen.fr
Abstract
It is shown that an interval estimate for a contrast between means can be straight-
forwardly computed, given only the observed contrast and the associated t or F test
statistic (or equivalently the corresponding p-value). This interval can be seen as a fre-
quentist confidence interval, as a standard Bayesian credibility interval, or as a fiducial
interval.
This gives Null Hypothesis Significance Tests (NHST) users the possibility of an easy
transition towards more appropriate statistical practices. Conceptual links between NHST
and interval estimates are outlined.
Introduction
Many recent papers have stressed on the necessity of changes in reporting experimental
results. A more and more widespread opinion is that inferential procedures that provide
genuine information about the size of effects must be used in addition or in place of Null
Hypothesis Significance Tests (NHST). So, in psychology, this has been recently made
official by the American Psychological Association Task Force on Statistical Inference.
The Task Force has proposed guidelines for revising the statistical section of the American
Psychological Association Manual. Following these guidelines, “interval estimates should
be given for any effect sizes involving principal outcomes” (Wilkinson et al., 1999).
Therefore a salutary project should be to equip NSHT users with tools that should
facilitate a smooth transition towards interval estimates. In this perspective a surprisingly
simple and virtually ignored result is the easiness to get an interval estimate for a difference
between two means (and more generally for a contrast between means) from the associated
t or F test.
c© Revue MODULAD, 2005 -249- Nume´ro 33
