  
Data Freshness Evaluation in Different Application Scenarios1 
 
Verónika Peralta, Mokrane Bouzeghoub 
 
Laboratoire PRISM, Université de Versailles 
45, avenue des Etats-Unis 
78035, Versailles cedex, FRANCE 
{Veronika.Peralta, Mokrane.Bouzeghoub}@prism.uvsq.fr 
 
Abstract. Data freshness has been identified as one of the most important data 
quality attributes in information systems. This importance increases especially in 
the context of systems that integrate a large set of autonomous data sources. In this 
paper we describe a quality evaluation framework which allows evaluation of data 
freshness in different architectural contexts. We also show how this quality factor 
may impact the reconfiguration of a data integration system to fulfill user 
expectations. 
 
1 Introduction 
 
Data freshness has been identified as one of the most important attributes of data quality for 
data consumers (Shin 2003) (Wang et al. 1996). Specifically, the increasing need to access to 
information which is available in several data sources introduces the problem of choosing 
between alternative data providers and of combining data having different freshness values 
(Naumann et al. 1999). This paper deals with data freshness evaluation in the context of a Data 
Integration System (DIS) that integrates data from different independent data sources and 
provides the users a uniform access to this data.  
Data freshness represents a family of quality factors among which currency and timeliness 
are representative examples: currency describes how stale is data with respect to the sources and 
timeliness describes how old is data. In (Bouzeghoub et al. 2004) we analyze these factors and 
several metrics proposed to measure them. In (Peralta et al. 2004), we proposed a framework for 
analyzing and evaluating data freshness based on a calculation dag which abstracts a workflow of 
integration activities. After a brief recall of this framework, this paper shows how it can 
practically be used in different application scenarios and how the data integration system can be 
improved in order to fulfill user requirements in terms of data freshness.  
The rest of the document is organized as follows: Section 2 briefly describes the data quality 
evaluation framework and discusses how to use it through different application scenarios. Section 
3 focuses on the possible improvement actions to put on the DIS workflow to achieve user 
requirements. Finally, section 4 concludes with our general remarks. 
                                                           
1
 This research was partially supported by the French Ministry of Research and New Technolologies under 
the ACI program devoted to Data Masses (ACI-MD), project #MD-33. 
- 373 - RNTI-E-5
