A Data Warehouse that Gathers Several Formalisms
to Capture Data Heterogeneity and Incompleteness
in the Field of Food Microbiological Safety
Patrice Buche∗, Juliette Dibie-Barthe´lemy∗∗
Ollivier Haemmerle´∗∗, Rallou Thomopoulos∗∗∗
∗INRA - Me´t@risk, 16 rue Claude Bernard, F-75231 Paris Cedex 05, France
Patrice.Buche@inapg.fr,
∗∗UMR INA P-G/INRA BIA, 16 rue Claude Bernard, F-75231 Paris Cedex 05, France
{Juliette.Dibie,Ollivier.Haemmerle}@inapg.fr
∗∗∗INRA - UMR IATE - bat. 31, 2 Place Viala 34060 Montpellier Cedex 1
rallou@ensam.inra.fr
Re´sume´. Notre travail porte sur la conception d’un entrepoˆt de donne´es
dans le domaine de l’analyse du risque alimentaire. Les donne´es expe´rimen-
tales stocke´es dans cet entrepoˆt ont trois caracte´ristiques principales qui
ont guide´ la conception de l’entrepoˆt : elles sont he´te´roge`nes, elles peuvent
eˆtre impre´cises, et l’entrepoˆt est par nature incomplet. Nous proposons
d’utiliser trois mode`les de donne´es : le mode`le relationnel, le mode`le des
graphes conceptuels et le mode`le XML. Ces mode`les ont e´te´ e´tendus afin
de pouvoir repre´senter des donne´es impre´cises sous la forme de distribu-
tions de possibilite´s. Les bases de donne´es construites sur ces mode`les sont
interroge´s simultane´ment avec le langage MIEL++. Dans ce langage, les
pre´fe´rences de l’utilisateur sont repre´sente´es par des sous-ensembles flous.
Des techniques de mise en correspondance floue sont utilise´es pour com-
parer pre´fe´rences et donne´es impre´cises.
1 Introduction
Since 1999, our team has been working with industrial and academic partners
on several projects which concern knowledge representation in the field of predictive
microbiology. In the Sym’Previus (http ://www.symprevius.org) and e.dot projects
(http ://www-rocq.inria.fr/verso/edot/), we work on the building of a data warehouse
composed of data concerning the behaviour of pathogenic germs in food products.
Those data are designed to be used in a tool dedicated to researchers in microbiology
or to industrials. The goal is to help them in a decision support approach in order to
prevent food products from contamination.
The information we have to store in our data warehouse presents several speci-
ficities. It is weakly-structured because information comes from heterogeneous sources
(scientific literature, industrial partners...) and is still rapidly evolving as predictive mi-
crobiology is a research field. It is imprecise because of the complexity of the underlying
biological processes, and because of the internal imprecision of the measurement tools.
The data warehouse is incomplete by nature since the number of experiments is poten-
tially infinite : it will never contain information about all the possible food products
- 109 - RNTI-B-1
