An Approach to Specify When Reselecting Views to be 
Materialized  
 
Henda Ben Ghezala*, Abdelaziz Abdellatif**, Ali Ben Ammar *** 
 
*Ecole Nationale des Sciences de l'Informatique , 2010 Manouba. Tunisie 
Henda.bg@cck.rnu.tn 
**Faculté des Sciences de Tunis, 2092 Tunis. Tunisie 
abdelaziz.abdellatif@fst.rnu.tn 
***Institut Supérieur de Documentation, 2010 Manouba. Tunisie 
ali.benammar@isd.rnu.tn 
 
 
 
Abstract: A data warehouse stores a large volume of data extracted from multiple 
sources. A set of materialized views is defined over the base tables in order to 
optimize OLAP (On-Line Analytical Processing) query response time. The 
selection of materialized views may be static or dynamic. The dynamic selection is 
continually controlled by a system that calibrates the set of views. The static 
selection is controlled periodically by the data warehouse administrator who 
provides the parameter values to the view selection program and defines the 
selection period. A short period may increase the system workload if there are 
unnecessary executions of the view selection program. A long period may decrease 
the query response time. In this paper we propose an algorithm to specify when to 
select views to be materialized in a static policy. That is when the view selection 
program should be run. Our main contribution is the use of some tolerance 
parameters to update and reselect the materialized views. The materialized views 
will be updated only when it is necessary. The view selection program will be 
executed either at the end of the selection period, defined by the administrator, or 
when there is a non tolerated increase of the query execution cost. The aim is to 
reduce the materialization cost and to guarantee a high query response time. Our 
experiment results show that, for some values of the tolerance parameters, our 
approach is more profitable than the static view selection algorithms.   
 
 
 
1. Introduction 
A data warehouse stores a large volume of data extracted from multiple sources. A set 
of materialized views is defined over the base tables in order to optimize OLAP (On-Line 
Analytical Processing) query response time. The selection of these materialized views is 
based on a cost model that combines, in general, the view maintenance cost and the query 
execution one. It respects a given limited amount of resources such as materialization time, 
storage space, or total view maintenance time. 
The selection of materialized views may be static [Agrawal et al., 
2000][Gupta,1997][Gupta et Mumick, 1999][Gupta et al., 1997][Harinarayan et al., 1996 
- 161 - RNTI-B-1
