OLAP query optimization : A Framework for
Combining Rule-Based and Cost-Based Approaches
Ladjel Bellatreche∗, Arnaud Giacometti ∗∗, Dominique Laurent ∗∗∗,
Patrick Marcel ∗∗, Hassina Mouloudi∗∗
∗ LISI/ENSMA
Te´le´port 2, 1, ave. Cle´ment Ader 86960 Futuroscope - France
bellatre@ensma.fr
∗∗ Universite´ Francois-Rabelais de Tours, LI
Master SIR, Antenne Universitaire, 3 place Jean Jaure`s 41000 Blois
(arnaud.giacometti, patrick.marcel, hassina.mouloudi)@univ-tours.fr
∗∗ Universite´ de Cergy-Pontoise
2, ave. A. Chauvin - BP 222 - 95302 Cergy-Pontoise Cedex - France
dominique.laurent@dept-info.u-cergy.fr
Abstract. To optimize queries in relational databases, two categories of
optimization techniques have been proposed : the Rule-Based Approach
(RBA), and the Cost-Based Approach (CBA). In the RBA, the optimizer
uses rule transformations using the relational algebra. In the CBA, the
optimizer uses a cost model to estimate the potential cost of each ope-
ration using statistics about the database and the tables involved in the
query. Usually both categories are implemented by commercial DBMSs
and are often intermixed. In multidimensional databases however, most of
query optimization techniques follow only the CBA to select optimization
structures such as : materialized views, advanced indexing schemes and
data partitioning. No approach has been proposed yet to rewrite OLAP
queries using a multidimensional algebra. In this paper, we show that
the RBA can be applied to multidimensional databases by rewriting each
OLAP query to obtain an efficient rewritten query that can be executed
using a CBA. In particular, we show that the RBA can be used to take
into account one of the specificities of OLAP which is the visualization
of the OLAP query result. We propose a multidimensional algebra that
represents the core of our RBA optimization, and we show how rewritten
queries can be processed using the CBA proposed for multidimensional
databases.
1 Introduction
A data warehouse (DW) integrates massive amounts of data from multiple
sources. In a DW, users access very large databases to carry out strategic analy-
sis for maintaining business competitiveness by executing complex OLAP queries
[Karloff et Mihail, 1999]. This complexity is due to the presence of join and aggre-
gation operations. Therefore, an efficient query processing becomes a critical issue. To
optimize these complex queries, several techniques were proposed that we can divide
- 177 - RNTI-B-1
