A Framework for Mesh Segmentation and Annotation using
Ontologies
Thomas Dietenbeck a,b,c,d,e, Ahlem Othmania,b, Marco Attenef , Jean-Marie Favreaua,b
aClermont Université, Université d’Auvergne, ISIT, BP10448, F-63000 Clermont-Ferrand
bCNRS, UMR6284, BP10448, F-63000 Clermont-Ferrand
cSorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR 7371, UMR_S 1146, LIB,
F-75013, Paris, France
dCNRS, UMR 7371, LIB, F-75013, Paris, France
eINSERM, UMR_S 1146, LIB, F-75013, Paris, France
fCNR-IMATI, Italy
Abstract. Mesh segmentation and annotation using semantics has received an
increased interest with the recent democratisation of 3D reconstruction methods.
The common approach is to perform this task in two steps, by first segmenting
the mesh and then annotating it. However, this approach does not allow one
part to take advantage of the other. In image processing, some methods are
combining segmentation and annotation, but they are not generic and require
implementation adjustments or rewritings for each modification of the expert
knowledge. In this work, we describe an original framework that mixes segmen-
tation and annotation while minimizing the required geometric analysis and we
give preliminary results showing its feasability.
Our framework provides a generic ontology describing object feature concepts
(geometry, topology, etc.) and algorithms allowing to detect these concepts.
This ontology can be enlarged by any expert to formally describe a specific do-
main. The formalized domain description is then used to automatically perform
the joint segmentation and annotation of objects and their features, by selecting
at each step the most relevant algorithm given the previously detected seman-
tics. This methodology has several advantages. Firsly it allows to segment and
annotate objects without any knowledge in mesh or image processing by sim-
ply describing the object features in terms of ontological concepts. Secondly
this framework can be easily reused and applied to different contexts by sim-
ply building on our generic ontology. Finally performing the joint segmentation
and annotation allows to use in an efficient way the expert knowledge, reducing
possible segmentation errors and the computation time by always launching the
most efficient algorithm.
1 Introduction
During the last two decades, an important work has been done in the data mining and mesh
processing communities to integrate a semantic dimension to their work. One of the main goal
- 275 -
