Mining Frequent Queries in Star Schemes
Tao-Yuan Jen∗, Dominique Laurent∗
Nicolas Spyratos∗∗, Oumar Sy∗∗∗
∗LICP, Universite´ de Cergy-Pontoise, 95302 Cergy-Pontoise Cedex, FRANCE
{tao-yuan.jen,dominique.laurent}@dept-info.u-cergy.fr
∗∗LRI, Universite´ Paris 11, 91405 Orsay Cedex, FRANCE
spyratos@lri.fr
∗∗∗Universite´ Gaston Berger, Saint-Louis, SENEGAL
oumar.sy@ugb.sn
Re´sume´. L’extraction de toutes les requeˆtes fre´quentes dans une base de
donne´es relationnelle est un proble`me difficile, meˆme si l’on ne conside`re
que des requeˆtes conjonctives. Nous montrons que ce proble`me devient
possible dans le cas suivant : le sche´ma de la base est un sche´ma en e´toile,
et les donne´es satisfont un ensemble de de´pendances fonctionnelles et de
contraintes re´fe´rentielles. De plus, les sche´mas en e´toile sont approprie´s
pour les entrepoˆts de donne´es et que les de´pendances fonctionnelles et
les contraintes re´fe´rentielles sont les contraintes les plus usuelles dans les
bases de donne´es. En conside´rant le mode`le des instances faibles, nous
montrons que les requeˆtes fre´quentes exprime´es par se´lection-projection
peuvent eˆtre extraites par des algorithmes de type Apriori.
1 Introduction
The general problem of mining all frequent queries in a (relational) database, i.e.,
all queries whose answer has a cardinality above a given threshold, is known to be
intractable, even if we consider conjunctive queries only (Goethals 2004).
However, mining all frequent queries from a database allows for the production
of relevant association rules that cannot be obtained by other approaches, even when
dealing with multiple tables, such as in (Dehaspe and Raedt 1997; Diop et al. 2002;
Faye et al. 1999; Han et al. 1996; Meo et al. 1997; Turmeaux et al. 2003). This is so
because, in these approaches, association rules are mined in the same table. On the
other hand, when mining all frequent queries, it is possible to obtain rules whose left and
right hand sides are frequent queries mined in different tables. The following example,
that serves as a running example throughout the paper, illustrates this point.
Example 1 Let ∆ be a database containing three tables, Cust, Prod and Sales, dea-
ling with customers, products and sales transactions, respectively, and suppose that :
– the table Cust is defined over the attributes Cid, Cname and Caddr, standing
respectively for the identifiers, the names and the addresses of customers,
– the table Prod is defined over the attributes Pid and Ptype, standing respectively
for the identifiers and the types of products,
– the table Sales is defined over the attributes Cid, Pid and Qty where Qty stands
for the quantity of a product bought by a customer.
RNTI-E-3331
