Incremental learning with latent factor models for attribute
prediction in social-attribute networks
Duc Kinh Le Tran∗,∗∗ Cécile Bothorel∗
Pascal Cheung Mon Chan∗∗
∗UMR CNRS 3192 Lab-STICC
Département LUSSI – Télécom Bretagne
{duc.letran, cecile.bothorel}@telecom-bretagne.eu
∗∗Orange Labs
{duckinh.letran, pascal.cheungmonchan}@orange.com
Abstract. In this paper, we are interested in the problem of predicting attributes
on the nodes in a social network. Most of the existing techniques addressing this
problem are offline learning techniques and are not suitable in situations where
massive data come in stream like social media. In this work, we use latent
factor models to predict unknown attributes of the nodes in a social network and
propose a method to incrementally update the prediction model on the arrivals
of new data. Experiments on a real social media dataset show that our method
is more rapid and can guarantee acceptable performances in comparison with
state-of-the-art non-incremental techniques.
1 Introduction and problem statement
With the explosion of social media on the Internet in recent years, mining social media
content has become more and more critical for many domains. One of the challenges of mining
social media is how to leverage relational information (e.g friendships, interactions between
social media users) and simultaneously attributes (e.g. users’ interests, textual or any other
additional information). Another challenge lies in the fact that these media provide vast and
continuous streams of data. Using offline learning techniques, we have to aggregate all the
data available from the past until the present. This approach is not suitable in this situation
because (1) as new data come, the size of the dataset grows, it get more and more expensive to
learn and to apply the model (2) this approach cannot capture the dynamic of the data stream:
old data and recent data are treated uniformly.
In this paper, we address both challenges by introducing an incremental learning method
for the task of predicting attributes of social actors in a social network. This problem has many
real world applications, for example to predict users’ interests or hobbies using social media.
We build a graph of interactions among the social media users and enrich the graph with a set
attributes on nodes. As the data (nodes, links) arrive as a permanent stream, we want to build
models to periodically predict unknown attributes on the nodes.
To formulate our problem, we adopt the social-attribute network (Yin et al. (2010)). A
social-attribute network (SAN) contains a social network Gs=(Vs, Es) where Vs is the set of
- 77 -
