A Galois connection semantics-based approach for
deriving generic bases of association rules
S. Ben Yahia, N. Doggaz Y. Slimani, J. Rezgui
De´partement des Sciences de l’Informatique
Faculte´ des Sciences de Tunis
Campus Universitaire, 1060 Tunis, Tunisie.
sadok.benyahia;yahya.slimani;narjes.doggaz@fst.rnu.tn;jihen rezgui@yahoo.fr
Re´sume´. L’augmentation vertigineuse de la taille des donne´es (textuelles ou
transactionnelles) est un de´fi constant pour la ”scalabilite´” des techniques d’ex-
traction des connaissances. Dans ce papier, on pre´sente une approche pour
la de´rivation des bases ge´ne´riques de re`gles associatives. Les principales ca-
racte´ristiques de cette approches sont les suivantes. D’une part, l’introduction
d’une structure de donne´es appele´e ”Trie-itemset” pour le stockage de la rela-
tion en entre´e. D’autre part, on utilise une me´thode ”Diviser pour re´gner” pour
re´duire le couˆt de construction de structures partiellement ordonne´es, a` partir
desquelles les bases ge´ne´riques de re`gles sont directement extraites.
1 Introduction
Much research in data mining from large databases has focused on the discovery of as-
sociation rules [Agrawal et Skirant, 1994, Brin et al., 1997, Manilla et al., 1994]. Association
rule generation is achieved from a set F of frequent itemsets in an extraction context D, for a
minimal support minsupp. An association rule r is a relation between itemsets of the form r :
X ⇒ (Y −X), in which X and Y are frequent itemsets, and X ⊂ Y . Itemsets X and (Y −X)
are called, respectively, antecedent and conclusion of the rule r. The valid association rules are
those of which the measure of confidence Conf(r) = support(Y )
support(X)
1 is greater than or equal to
the minimal threshold of confidence, named minconf. If Conf(r) = 1 then r is called exact as-
sociation rule (ER), otherwise it is called approximative association rule (AR). Exploiting and
visualizing association rules is far from being a trivial task, mostly because of the huge number
of potentially interesting rules that can be drawn from a dataset. Various techniques are used
to limit the number of reported rules, starting by basic pruning techniques based on thre-
sholds for both the frequency of the represented pattern (called the support) and the strength
of the dependency between antecedent and conclusion (called the confidence). More advanced
techniques that produce only a limited number of the entire set of rules rely on closures and
Galois connections [Bastide et al., 2000, Stumme et al., 2001, Zaki, 2000], which are in turn
derived from Galois lattice theory and formal concept analysis (FCA) [Ganter et Wille, 1999].
Finally, works on FCA have yielded a row of results on compact representations of closed
set families, also called bases, whose impact on association rule reduction is currently under
intensive investigation within the community [Bastide et al., 2000, Stumme et al., 2001].
In this paper, we propose a trie-based new data structure called ”Itemset-trie” tree.
Itemset-trie tree extends the idea claimed by the authors of FPTree [Han et al., 2000] and
CATS [Cheung et Zaiane, 2003], aiming to improve storage compression and to allow (closed)
frequent pattern mining without ”explicit” candidate itemsets generation. Next, we propose
an algorithm, falling in the characterization ”Divide and Conquer” to extract the frequent
closed itemsets with their associated minimal generators. It is noteworthy that the derivation
of Luxemburger base is based on the exploration of such closed itemsets organized upon
their natural partial order (also called precedence relation). That’s why we construct on the
