A Metric Approach to Supervised Discretization
Dan Simovici
Richard Butterworth
University of Massachusetts Boston
Department of Computer Science, Boston, MA 02125, USA
dsim@cs.umb.edu
University of Massachusetts Boston
Department of Computer Science, Boston, MA 02125, USA
rickb@cs.umb.edu
Resume. Nous presentons une nouvelle approche a la discretisation su-
pervisee des attributs continues qui se sert de l'espace metrique des parti-
tions d'un ensemble ni. Nous discutons deux nouvelles idees fondamen-
tales : une generalisation des techniques de discretisation de Fayyad-Irani
basee sur une distance sur des partitions, derivee de l'entropie generalisee
de Daroczy, et un nouveau critere geometrique pour arre^ter l'algorithme
de discretisation. Les arbres de decision resultants sont plus petits, ont
moins de feuilles, et montrent des niveaux plus eleves d'exactitude etablis
par la validation croisee stratiee.
1 Introduction
Many machine learning and data mining algorithms can deal only with nominal
attributes; however, many data sets of interest have numerical domains and this makes
discretization, the conversion from numerical to nominal domains, an important task
for data preparation. The literature that deals with discretization is vast and it in-
cludes ideas ranging from xed k-interval discretization [Dougherty et al., 1995], fuzzy
discretization (see [Kononenko, 1993]), Shannon-entropy discretization due to Fayyad
and Irani presented in [Fayyad, 1991, Fayyad et Irani, 1993], proportional k-interval
discretization (see [Yang et Webb, 2003]), or techniques that are capable of dealing
with highly dependent attributes (cf. [Robnik et Kononenko, 1995]). The goal of this
paper is to introduce a new approach to supervised discretization using the metric
space of partitions over nite sets. We present two new basic ideas: a generalization of
Fayyad-Irani discretization techniques that relies on a metric on partitions dened by
Daroczy's generalized entropy, and a new geometric criterion for halting the discreti-
zation process that extends a similar approach proposed by Cerquides and Lopez de
Mantaras in [Cerquides et de Mantaras, 1997] using a metric generated by Shannon's
entropy.
A partition of a non-empty set S is a non-empty collection of non-empty subsets
of S,  = fPi j i 2 Ig such that
S
fPi j i 2 Ig = S, and i;j 2 I , i 6= j implies
Pi \ Pj = ;. The set of partitions of S is denoted by PART(S). For a subset L of M
the trace of the partition  on the set L is the partition L = fPi \ L j 1  i 
k and Pi \L 6= ;g. Daroczy's -entropy for a partition  = fP1; : : : ;Pkg 2 PART(S) is
