Extraction of Text Summary Using Latent Semantic Indexing 
and Information Retrieval Technique: Comparison of Four 
Strategies 
 
 
Abdelghani Bellaachia*, Anand Mahajan* 
 
*Computer Science Department 
George Washington University 
Washington DC, 20052 
bell@gwu.edu 
http://seas.gwu.edu/~bell 
 
 
Abstract. In this paper, we present four generic text summarization 
techniques. Each technique extracts a text summary by ranking and extracting 
sentences from an original document. The first method, SUMMARIZER 1, 
uses standard information retrieval (IR) methods to rank sentences. The second 
method, SUMMARIZER 2, uses the Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) 
technique to identify semantically important sentences, for summary creations. 
The third method, SUMMARIZER 3, uses a combination of the latent 
semantic analysis technique, reduction and relevance measure. The fourth 
method simply uses the TF*IDF (Term frequency * Inverse Document 
frequency) weighting scheme. Evaluations of the four methods are conducted 
using Document Understanding Conferences (DUC) datasets from NIST.  We 
have compared the summary of each method with the manual summaries. 
Summarizer 4, with its lowest overhead, has comparable performance 
to summarizer 1. Analysis shows that a combination of LSA technique 
and the relevance measure (Summarizer 3) has the best performance on 
an average. 
 
1. Introduction 
 
The speed and the scale of information dissemination have dramatically increased with 
the explosive growth of the worldwide web. Using conventional information retrieval (IR) 
techniques to find relevant information effectively in a vast sea of accessible text documents 
on the Internet, has become more and more insufficient. Text search engines serve as 
information filters that sift out an initial set of relevant documents. Their keyword-based 
approach retrieves millions of hits by which the user is overwhelmed. Hence, there is a need 
for techniques to quickly identify the most relevant documents. Text summarizers can be 
used to help users identify final set of relevant documents. Text search and summarization 
are two essential technologies that complement each other. Presenting the user with a 
summary of each document greatly facilitates the task of finding the desired documents.  
The goals of text summarizers can be categorized by their intent, focus and coverage 
[MCDONALD ET AL.]. Intent refers to the potential use of the summary. Firmin and 
