How well go Lattice Algorithms on currently used
Machine Learning TestBeds ?

Huaiguo Fu, Engelbert Mephu Nguifo

CRIL—CNRS FRE2499, Université d’Artois
Rue de l’université SP 16, 62307 Lens cedex. France
{fu,mephu}@cril.univ-artois.fr

Abstract. Many research papers in classiﬁcation or association rules in-
crease the interest of Concept lattices structures for data mining (DM) and
machine learning  To increase the eﬁiciency of concept lattice—based
algorithms in ML, it is necessary to make use of an eﬁicient algorithm to
build concept lattices. In fact, more than ten algorithms for generating
concept lattices were published. As real data sets for data mining are very
large, concept lattice structure suffers from its complexity issues on such
data. The efﬁciency and performance of concept lattices algorithms are
very different from one to another. So we need to compare the existing
lattice algorithms with large data. We implemented the four ﬁrst algo—
rithms in Java environment and compared these algorithms on about 30
datasets of the UCI repository that are well established to be used to
compare ML algorithms. Preliminary results give preference to Ganter’s
algorithm, and then to Bordat’s algorithm, which do not ﬁt well with the
recommendations of Kuznetsov and Obiedkov. Furthermore, we analyzed
the duality of the lattice-based algorithms.

1 Introduction

Concept is an important and basic means of knowledge representation, since it
represents abstraction and generalization of objects. A concept deﬁnes a subset of ob—
jects which shares some common attributes or properties. Concept lattice structure
[Ganter and Wille, 1999] has shown to be an effective tool for data analysis, knowledge
discovery, and information retrieval, etc [Mephu Nguifo et al., 2002]. It shows how ob-
jects can be hierarchically grouped together according to their common attributes.
Researchers of different domains study it in theory and application of data analysis
and formal knowledge representation etc.

Several algorithms are proposed to build concepts or concept lattices of a context :
Bordat [Bordat, 1986], Ganter (NextClosure) [Ganter, 1984], Chein [Chein, 1969], Nor—
ris [Norris, 1978], Godin [Godin et al., 1995], Nourine [Nourine and Raynaud, 1999],
Carpineto [Carpineto and Romano, 1996], and Valtchev[Valtchev and Missaoui, 2001],
etc. Some algorithms can generate also diagram graphs of concept lattices. The per-
formance of the lattice algorithm is very important for its application to data mining
(DM). In fact real data sets for DM are very large, e.g. the customer data of a com—
pany. In the worst case, the generation of lattice nodes increases exponentially. The
eﬁiciency of concept lattice algorithms are different from one to another. So we need

