Introduction : 
knowledge quality measures in a data-mining process 
Vipin Kumar*, ** 
* Director, Army High Performance Computing Research Center 
** Professor, Department of Computer Science & Eng, University of Minnesota 
kumar@cs.umn.edu
http://www.cs.umn.edu/~kumar
The author. Vipin Kumar is currently the Director of Army High Performance 
Computing Research Center and Professor of Computer Science and Engineering at the 
University of Minnesota.  His research interests include High Performance computing, 
data mining, and their applications to information assurance.  He has authored over 200 
research articles, and co-edited or co-authored 9 books including the widely used text 
book ``Introduction to Parallel Computing", and an upcoming edited collection, 
"Managing Cyber Threats: Issues, Approaches and Challenges" to be published by 
Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
Kumar has served as chair/co-chair for many conferences/workshops in the area of data 
mining and parallel computing, including the IEEE International Conference on Data 
Mining (2002) and the 15th International Parallel and Distributed Processing 
Symposium (2001).  Kumar serves as the chair of the steering committee of the SIAM 
International Conference on Data Mining, and serves on the editorial boards of 
Knowledge and Information Systems, IEEE Computational Intelligence Bulletin, 
Annual Review of Intelligent Informatics, Parallel Computing, the Journal of Parallel 
and Distributed Computing, and has served on the editorial boards of IEEE 
Transactions of Data and Knowledge Engineering (93-97), IEEE Concurrency (1997-
2000), and IEEE Parallel and Distributed Technology (1995-1997).  He is a Fellow of 
IEEE, a member of SIAM, and ACM, and a Fellow of the Minnesota Supercomputer 
Institute.
Advances in information technology and data collection methods have led to the 
availability of large data sets in commercial enterprises and in a wide variety of scientific and 
engineering disciplines. Examples of large data sets are genomic data, climate data, and 
market basket data collected at commercial outlets. There is an unprecedented opportunity to 
analyze such data and extract intelligent and useful information. The potential for return to 
the society from this analysis is huge. For example, the understanding of genome expression 
data can lead to the development of better and cheaper drugs that have fewer side effects. 
The information collected from the analysis of market-basket data can improve the 
profitability of a corporation. Indeed, researchers in the fast growing discipline of knowledge 
RNTI-E-1     1
