Representative training sets for classification and the
variability of empirical distributions
Saaid Baraty, Dan Simovici
University of Massachusetts Boston
sbaraty@cs.umb.edu, dsim@cs.umb.edu
Abstract. We propose a novel approach for the estimation of the size of training
sets that are needed for constructing valid models in machine learning and data
mining. We aim to provide a good representation of the underlying population
without making any distributional assumptions.
Our technique is based on the computation of the standard deviation of the χ2-
statistics of a series of samples. When successive statistics are relatively close,
we assume that the samples produced represent adequately the true underlying
distribution of the population, and the models learned from these samples will
behave almost as well as models learned on the entire population.
We validate our results by experiments involving classifiers of various levels of
complexity and learning capabilities.
1 Introduction
Estimating a sample size that allows the inference of a good model is an important part of
the learning process. We seek to determine the minimum size of a sample which is very likely
to be a “fair” representative of the underlying population. Models learned from these samples
will behave almost as well as models learned on the entire population and any increase in the
size of the sample would result in insignificant increases in the quality of the models.
Our goal is to determine sample sizes that are sufficient to ensure that these samples ade-
quately represent the underlying population. These samples are used as training sets for con-
structing models comparable in performance with those inferred from the entire population,
but are cheaper to build.
Sections 2 and 3 describe in detail our approach for finding the size of a sample from a data
set and a population respectively. The experimental work is presented in Section 4.
2 Estimating the size of a sample from data
Let U = {u1, u2, . . . , un} be a set of attributes. The set of possible states for attribute ui,
Dom(ui), is assumed to be finite and is commonly referred to as domain of ui. The notion of
domain of attributes is extended to sets of attributes by defining the set Dom(V ) for the set of
attributes V ⊆ U as Dom(V ) =∏v∈V Dom(v).
- 299 -
