CA-Manager: a middleware for mutual enrichment between
information extraction systems and knowledge repositories
Hacène Cherfi∗, Martin Coste∗, and Florence Amardeilh∗
∗Mondeca SA, 3 cité Nollez - 75018 Paris
{firstname.lastname}@mondeca.com,
http://www.mondeca.com
Abstract. Knowledge enrichment aims at bridging the large gap between struc-
tured knowledge and the large volumes of unstructured text data that companies
and people need to deal with daily. Alas, the process is very laborious and
error-prone, even when performed semi-automatically. The two key steps in
this process -semantic annotation and ontology population- still hold outstand-
ing challenges although they are actively studied by researchers. While there
exists a large number of tools, many of them lack compliance with Semantic
Web standards, but more important, they lack the flexibility to customise the en-
tire knowledge acquisition workflow. In this paper, we present the Content Aug-
mentation Manager (CA-Manager) framework which plays a middleware role
between Information Extraction (IE) tools and knowledge repositories (KR)s.
CA-Manager allows us an easy plug-in of various types of components leading
to create a virtuous cycle within the annotation workflow.
1 Introduction
One of the main challenges for the large adoption of Semantic Web technologies is to get
semantic data in order to be able to develop smarter applications to search, browse, publish, in-
fer, etc. Even Google understood this by buying Freebase 1, an online graph-based knowledge
base of thousands of interconnected entities. Google can now build its new semantic search en-
gine, called Knowledge Graph 2. The exponential growth of semantic data published through
the Linked Open Data Initiative is another important marker of the actual technological shift
that we are going through. But everyone is not Google nor have semantic datasets ready to
be publicly exposed (or not) to build the innovative services/applications of tomorrow. It is
absolutely necessary to provide tools to support the creation of such knowledge repositories.
The first step is the creation of an ontology to represent the knowledge of the concerned
domain. An ontology has been defined as a formal conceptualization of a model, composed
of concepts, properties (attributes and relations) and axioms. It can be understandable by
machines, used for sharing and re-using knowledge and permitting reasoning thanks to the
semantics explicitly represented in the ontology. This issue alone is a major research field of
1. http://www.freebase.com
2. http://mashable.com/2012/02/13/google-knowledge-graph-change-search
- 15 -
