Multiple and Joint Correspondence Analysis: Testing the True Dimension of a
Study
Sergio Camiz
Dipartimento di Matematica, Sapienza Universita` di Roma
E-mail: sergio.camiz@uniroma1.it,
and Gasta˜o Coelho Gomes
Departamento de Me´todos Estat´ısticos, Universidade Federal do Rio de
Janeiro
E-mail: gastao@im.ufrj.br
Abstract
The problem of the proper dimension of a Multiple Correspondence Analysis (MCA) is
discussed, based on both the re-evaluation of the explained inertia sensu Benze´cri (1979)
and Greenacre (2006) and a test proposed by Ben Ammou and Saporta (1998). This
leads to the consideration of a better reconstruction of the off-diagonal sub-tables of
the Burt’s table crossing the nominal characters taken into the account. Thus, Greenacre
(1988) Joint Correspondence Analysis (JCA) is introduced and the results obtained on two
applications are shown. The quality of reconstruction of bothMCA and JCA solutions are
compared to the Simple Correspondence Analysis results of the two-way tables. It results
that JCA’s reduced-dimensional reconstruction is much better than the MCA’s one, that
reveals highly biased and non-monotonous. Keywords: Correspondence Analysis, Multiple
Correspondence Analysis, Joint Correspondence Analysis.
Re´sume´
On discute le proble`me de la dimension d’une Analyse des Correspondances Multiples,
base´ soit sur la re´-evaluation de l’inertie explique´e sensu Benze´cri (1979) et Greenacre
(2006) et le test propose´ par Ben Ammou and Saporta (1998). Ceci conduit a` la con-
side´ration d’une meilleure reconstruction des sous-tableaux hors-diagonale du tableau de
Burt qui croise les characte`res nominaux conside´re´s. On introduit donc l’Analyse des
Correspondances Conjointe (JCA, Greenacre, 1988) et on montre les re´sultats obtenu
dans deux applications. On compare aussi la qualite´ de la reconstruction obtenue par les
solutions MCA et JCA avec les re´sultats de l’Analyse des Correspondances Simples sur
les tableaux a` deux voies. l re´sulte que la reconstruction de dimensione re´duite de la JCA
est fort meilleure de celle de la MCA, qui s’ave`re fort biaise´e et non-monotone. Mots-cle´s:
Analyse des Correspondances Simple, Analyse des Correspondances Multiples, Analyse
des Correspondances Conjointe.
1 Introduction
The identification of the dimension of a data table under study is a crucial issue of most
multidimensional scaling techniques. A distinction should be done between linear scaling, in
which the encapsulated solutions allows an a posteriori choice of the user, and non-linear one,
in which usually the solution dimension is an a priori choice that conditions the results. As the
latter may be only hypothesized, e.g. according to the results of a previous linear scaling that
may be used as a starting configuration, the identification in the linear case has an importance
that goes beyond the simple linear case, to involve most of the analysis that follow the scaling
