Gathering Real OLAP Analysis Sessions: A Feedback
Julien Aligon∗
∗Laboratoire d’Informatique – Université François Rabelais Tours, France
julien.aligon@univ-tours.fr
Abstract. The use of OLAP sessions, conducted by professional analysts, seems
to be the best way to assess the relevance of OLAP solutions based on former
queries (in particular with user-centric approaches, like recommendation or per-
sonalization of queries). However, for scholar research teams, obtaining such
logs is often difficult. Moreover, the complexity of the queries produced in these
logs can lead to an important treatment of them, denaturing the performed anal-
ysis. In this paper, we propose a feedback from real OLAP sessions performed
by graduate students in Business Intelligence. This feedback reports the design
of questionnaires and the use of an original user interface to easily conduct real
OLAP sessions.
1 Introduction
In the context of relational databases ((Chaudhuri et al., 2003), (Golfarelli, 2003), (Khous-
sainova et al., 2011), (Akbarnejad et al., 2010)) or multidimensional databases ((Aligon et al.,
2011), (Aligon et al., 2013b)), the use of logs is essential for assessing the relevance of solu-
tions based on former queries. It is obvious that real logs (and more generally real data) are
most relevant to assess the user-centric approaches, like recommendation or personalization of
queries. Unfortunately, it is often difficult for scholar research teams to obtain real logs from
professional analysts, in particular by the fact they can contain sensitive data. Even when the
case exists, the complexity of the queries can lead to an important treatment of them. Indeed,
the user-centric approaches are generally based on more basic query definition than those im-
plemented in the tools used by professional analysts. Consequently, the number of queries can
be strongly reduced, or too simplified. Finally the analysis performed in these types of logs
can be denatured.
In the context of multidimensional databases, we propose in this paper a feedback reporting
the gathering of real logs, according to a pre-defined query model. Precisely, this feedback is
based on tests conducted with graduate students in Business Intelligence. Indeed, it has been
assumed in (Runeson, 2003) that graduate students could perform analysis sessions as good as
professional analysts. In order to control the type of queries we have to generate, we propose
a new user interface for designing OLAP sessions. Note that the aim of this paper is not to
propose a benchmark of OLAP sessions, but is a first approach for this long-term perspective
by describing a feedback from sessions designed by students.
The paper is organized as follows. A related work is given Section 2. Section 3 describes
the database as the OLAP cube model used during the tests with the students. Section 4 refers
- 149 -
