Jenga and the Art of Data-Intensive Ecosystems Maintenance
Panos Vassiliadis∗
∗Technische Universität Berlin, Germany
Software maintenance amounts up to 60% of the resources spent on building and operating
a software system. Data-intensive ecosystems that include several software applications tightly
coupled to underlying data repositories cannot escape the above rule. In such environments, the
impact of evolution is three-fold: (a) syntactical (meaning, that the evolution of either the data
repositories or the software that implements the operational processes of the data warehouse
can lead to operational failures and crashes due to some form of syntactic incorrectness), (b)
semantic (meaning that changes in a view or a data transformation module can lead to different
semantics for the propagated data), and (c) performance-oriented, as different configurations
of the ecosystem’s components (be it data or software) lead to different performance for its
operations.
As in all data-intensive ecosystems, the evolution of the software constructs of a data ware-
house environment can severely affect its operations. In this talk, we focus on two aspects of
the management of data warehouse evolution. On the one hand, we are interested in predicting
the maintenance effort of ETL workflows. To this end, we present the findings of a case study
on how a set of graph-theoretic metrics can be used for the prediction of evolution vulnerabil-
ity for the components of ETL scenarios. On the other hand, we are interested in supporting
the graceful evolution of the ecosystem’s components and we present a method for the adap-
tation of ecosystems that assess the potential impact of a change and rewrite the ecosystem’s
components in order to adapt to the change.
Panos Vassiliadis graduated the Varvakio Experimental School in 1990 and obtained his
Diploma in Electrical Engineering and his PhD from the Department of Electrical and Com-
puter Engineering, of the National Technical University of Athens (NTUA) in 1995 and 2000,
respectively. He has joined the Department of Computer Science of the University of Ioannina
in 2002 and since then, He is a member of the Distributed Management of Data (DMOD)
Laboratory. So far, his research has focused on Data Warehouse technology, with particu-
lar interest on issues like data warehouse metadata repositories and metadata modeling, data
warehouse quality, On-Line Analytical Processing (OLAP), and Extraction-Transformation-
Loading (ETL). Currently, his on-going research is also targeted towards Metadata-Rich Data-
Centric Information Systems, with particular emphasis to the modeling, pattern-based design,
and evolution of their underlying database infrastructure as well as to Web-Services with par-
ticular emphasis to SOA maintenance.
- 5 -
