Sharing-based Privacy and Availability of
Cloud Data Warehouses
Varunya Attasena, Nouria Harbi and Jérôme Darmont
Université de Lyon (ERIC Lyon 2)
varunya.attasena@eric.univ-lyon2.fr
nouria.harbi@univ-lyon2.fr
jerome.darmont@univ-lyon2.fr
Abstract. Cloud computing can help reduce costs, increase business agility and
deploy applications with a high return on investment such as data warehouses.
However, storing and managing data in the cloud may not be fully trustwor-
thy. In this article, we focus on both data security (data privacy, availability and
integrity) and data analysis in the cloud. To solve the data security issue, we pro-
pose a new (m,n, t) multi secret sharing scheme based on block cryptography,
secret sharing and hash functions. Moreover, we apply this solution onto a cloud
data warehouse such that data security and data analysis are addressed. An ex-
tensive security and performance analysis shows that the proposed schemes can
prevent most attacks, guarantee data availability and integrity, and allow analyz-
ing data at low costs (data storage, data transfer and time computation) in the
pay-as-you-go economic model in the cloud.
1 Introduction
Business intelligence (BI) and data analytics have been an ever-growing trend in many
business (e.g., finance, telecoms, insurance, logistics. . . ) and non-business (e.g., agriculture,
medicine, health and environment. . . ) domains for more than twenty years. The more recent
advent of cloud computing now theoretically allows to deploy data analytics more easily. Data
that would have earlier been too costly to process in time, money or human resources can
be analyzed efficiently and at lower costs. Building a traditional BI system indeed typically
necessitates an important initial investment. By contrast, with the cloud pay-as-you-go model,
users punctually devote small amounts of resources in return for a one-time advantage. This
trend is currently supported by numerous “BI as a service” offerings by both cloud start-ups
and major BI industry vendors, with high economic stakes.
Moreover, the elasticity characteristic of cloud computing, i.e., the dynamic on-demand
provisioning of resources, does not only help scale performance up or down, but also enables
to dynamically bring in new data sources to meet emerging needs for new analyses. Thus,
data analytics is likely to be increasingly demanded by independent actors grouping together
to achieve a temporary common goal through a collaborative community effort. For instance,
open data, which are easily accessed from the Web, are in high demand. They could be in-
tegrated to private data and cross-analyzed with intelligible on-line tools featuring advanced
- 17 -
