A POS Tagger analysed in collaboration environments and
literary texts
Dumitru-Clementin Cercel∗
S¸tefan Tra˘us¸an-Matu∗∗
∗University "Politehnica" of Bucharest,
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Splaiul Independent¸ei Bd., No. 313, Bucharest, Romania
clementin.cercel@gmail.com
∗∗Romanian Academy Research Institute for Artificial Intelligence
13 Septembrie Street, No. 13, Bucharest, Romania
stefan.trausan@cs.pub.ro
Abstract. Part-of-speech (POS) tagging is often used in other modules of nat-
ural language processing and therefore the results of this process should be as
precise as possible. Many different types of taggers have been developed to im-
prove the accuracy of the results in the field of literature or newspapers. Nowa-
days when the internet is widespread, the environments for online collaboration
as chats, forums, blogs, wikis have become important means of communica-
tion. The purpose of this research is to analyse the results of tagging the words
obtained from the labelling of the words from the online collaboration environ-
ments and literary texts with the corresponding parts of speech. In the case of
POS tagging, the ambiguities arise due to the fact that a word may have multiple
morphological values depending on context.
1 Introduction
Part-of-speech (POS) tagging is the process of grammatical labelling of each word inside
a text with its appropriate part of speech. Labelling may also contain extra information related
to the morphological characteristics of the respective language like number, gender, person,
tense and aspect of the verb.
Many different types of taggers have been developed to improve the accuracy of the re-
sults in the field of literature or newspapers. Nowadays when the internet is widespread, the
environments for online collaboration as chats, forums, blogs, wikis have become important
means of communication. The purpose of the research presented in this paper is performing a
comparative analysis of POS tagging in collaborative corpora (specifically for chats, Wikipedia
and Twitter as an example of microbloggins) and literature (the texts from Brown corpus). In
this aim we implemented a trigram HMM tagger according to Jurafsky and Martin (2000) and
Brants (2000).
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. In section 2 we briefly review: the state
of the art approaches to POS tagging, the Markov Hidden Model, the implementation of the
