Detecting Academic Plagiarism with Graphs
Bin-Hui Chou, Einoshin Suzuki
Dept. Informatics, Kyushu University, Japan
chou@i.kyushu-u.ac.jp, suzuki@inf.kyushu-u.ac.jp
Abstract. In this paper, we tackle the problem of detecting academic plagia-
rism, which is considered as a severe problem owing to the convenience of on-
line publishing. Typical information retrieval methods, stopword-based methods
and ngerprinting methods, are commonly used to detect plagiarism by using
the sequence of words as they appear in the article. As such, they fail to detect
plagiarism when an author reconstructs a source article by re-ordering and re-
combining phrases. Because graph structure ts for representing relationships
between entities, we propose a novel plagiarism detection method, in which we
use graphs to represent documents by modeling grammatical relationships be-
tween words. Experimental results show that our proposed method outperforms
two n-gram methods and increases recall values by 10 to 20%.
1 Introduction
Online publishing provides a platform for researchers to share their research results while
it also brings a severe side effect, the academic plagiarism problem. That is, students or re-
searchers copy all the content or a part of passages from others' papers without appropriate
citation (Howard, 1995). It is difcult for editors of proceedings and journals to discover all
the plagiarism behaviors due to the time limitation and the quantity of publications. An auto-
matic detection method can be used to help editors' jobs and to mitigate the problem.
Existing methods of plagiarism detection evaluate document similarities by using content
words (Gustafson et al., 2008; Hoad and Zobel, 2003), stopwords (Stamatatos, 2011) or docu-
ment ngerprints (Seo and Croft, 2008; Schleimer, 2003). As common in information retrieval
(IR), methods (Grman and Ravas, 2011; Gustafson et al., 2008; Hoad and Zobel, 2003) dis-
card stopwords, e.g., “the”, “is”, and regard the remaining content words as meaningful words.
This kind of methods use sequences of the content words to represent a document. Stamatatos
(2011) considers that a plagiarist may replace content words to avoid detection, and proposed
to represent documents by removing content words but retaining stopwords. Seo and Croft
(2008); Schleimer (2003) use hashes of xed-length chunks as document ngerprints.
Both directly copying and paraphrasing passages without citation are considered as aca-
demic plagiarism (Howard, 1995; Rosamond, 2002). Here, we aim to detect plagiarized doc-
uments where one paraphrases text from other documents by re-ordering phrases or altering
modiers. Most of the existing approaches use sequences of words as they appear in the doc-
ument to represent the document so they fail to detect this kind of plagiarism.
