Towards a New Science of Big Data Analytics, based on the
Geometry and the Topology of Complex, Hierarchic Systems
Fionn Murtagh∗
∗Royal Holloway, University of London
fionn@cs.rhul.ac.uk
1 Summary
My work is concerned with pattern recognition, knowledge discovery, computer learning
and statistics. I address how geometry and topology can uncover and empower the semantics
of data. In addition to the semantics of data that can be explored using Correspondence Ana-
lysis and related multivariate data analyses, hierarchy is a fundamental concept in this work. I
address not only low dimensional projection for display purposes, but carry out search and pat-
tern recognition, whenever useful, in very high dimensional spaces. High dimensional spaces
present very different characteristics from low dimensions, I have shown that in a particular
sense very high dimensional space becomes, as dimensionality increases, hierarchical. I have
also shown how in hierarchy, and hence in an ultrametric topological mapping of information
space, we track change or anomaly or rupture.
In this presentation, the first theme discussed is that of linear time hierarchical clustering
with application to sky survey data in astronomy, and to chemo-informatics. The second theme
discussed is computational text analysis. It is interesting to note that J.P. Benzécri’s original
motivation was in language and linguistics. In my text analysis work, I have taken the dictum
of McKee (Story : Substance, Structure, Style and the Principles of Screenwriting, Methuen,
1999) that "text is the sensory surface of a work of art" and show just how this insight can
be rendered in computational terms. This leads to demarcating, tracking, statistical modelling,
visualizing, and pattern recognition of narrative. In an application to collaborative writing, I
developed an interactive framework for critiquing, and assessing fit and appropriateness of
content, on the basis of semantics, leading to books that were published as e-books, having
been written by school children in a few days of collaborative class work. In many aspects
of this work, hierarchy expresses both continuity and change in the textual narrative or in the
narrative of chronological events.
2 Biography
Fionn Murtagh is Professor of Computer Science in the University of London, at Royal
Holloway (http ://www.cs.rhul.ac.uk/home/fionn). For the past 5 years he was directing Science
Foundation Ireland’s funding programmes across a wide area including semantic and sensor
web, renewable energy, nanotechnology, and telecommunications. In the past he has held Full
