A hybrid recommender system to predict online job offer
performance
Julie Séguéla∗,∗∗, Gilbert Saporta∗
∗Cédric-CNAM, 292 rue Saint-Martin, 75003 Paris, France
gilbert.saporta@cnam.fr
∗∗Multiposting.fr, 23 rue d’Aumale, 75009 Paris, France
jseguela@multiposting.fr
Abstract. With the expansion of internet to advertise, the number of potential
channels is increasing every day. In the Human Resource domain, recruiters have
to choose between hundreds of job search web sites when they post a job offer
on the internet. In order to save costs, assessing job board expected performance
has become necessary. In this paper, three recommender systems providing job
board performance estimation for a given job posting are introduced. This work
refers principally to the new item problem, which is still a challenging topic in
the literature. The first system (PLS-R) is a content-based approach, while others
are hybrid recommendation approaches. Estimation is made on item neighbor-
hood according to a “naive” similarity or a supervised similarity measure. These
predictive algorithms are compared through experiments on a real dataset. In this
application, supervised similarity-based system overcomes the lacks of other ap-
proaches and outperforms them.
1 Introduction
Context and objectives. In domains such as Marketing, Advertising or even Human Re-
sources (sourcing), decisionmakers have to choose the most suitable channels according to
their objectives when starting a campaign. With the expansion of internet to advertise, the
number of potential channels (and targets) is exponentially growing. Today, a great challenge
common to several research domains is the development of intelligent tools to support users in
their choices. In this work, we focus on an issue encountered in the Human resource area. The
rapid increase in the number of job search web sites (job boards) has made crucial the assess-
ing of job posting performance. A job posting is a job offer published on the web, possibly on
several job boards simultaneously. Performance is assumed to be the number of applications
received on a job board. Posting a job offer on a job board is very expensive, so choosing
wisely the channels to use is a very relevant task.
In this context, we are introducing a predictive algorithm of job posting performance (or
return) on job boards. We resort to an innovative application of recommender systems: the goal
of such systems is to help users to find items that they should appreciate from huge catalogues
on the basis of previously attributed ratings. In our application:
