Adaptive Dynamic Clustering Algorithm for Interval-valued
Data based on Squared-Wasserstein Distance
Rong Guan∗, Yves Lechevallier∗∗
Huiwen Wang∗
∗School of Economics and Management, Beihang University, Beijing, 100191, China
rongguan77@gmail.com (R. Guan)
wanghw@vip.sina.com (H. Wang)
∗∗INRIA-Institut National de Recherche en Informatique et en Automatique Domaine de Voluceau,
Rocquencourt B.P.105, 78153 Le Chesnay Cedex, France
Yves.Lechevallier@inria.fr
Abstract. Wide applications of interval-valued data in various domains have
triggered the call for more powerful analytical tools. In light of this, this paper
has presented an adaptive dynamic clustering algorithm for interval-valued data,
using squared-Wasserstein distance. Experiments on both synthetic data and real
data have unveiled the merits of the proposed algorithm.
1 Introduction
The technique of clustering deals with finding a structure in a collection of objects, which
groups objects of similar kind into respective categories. As a main task of explorative statis-
tical analysis, clustering has been widely used in machine learning, pattern recognition, image
analysis and other fields of data mining.
The development of computer science in recent decades has enabled us to record immense
amount of data. Data sets with a large number of objects are commonly seen in clustering.
In some cases, however, analysts may prefer to concentrate on higher level conceptual objects
rather than massive and too-specific individual objects. For example, it makes more sense to
perform clustering on consumer groups, say male and female, or the young and the old, in or-
der to analyze their buying behaviors. Potential applications also exist in complex-structured
database or privacy-preserved census data, where conceptual observations should be employed
to prevent identification of specific individuals. Symbolic Data Analysis (Diday, 1989; Bock
and Diday, 2000; Billard and Diday, 2003; Diday and Noirhomme-Fraiture, 2008) has directed
an innovative way for solving this problem. The technique aims to generalize large-scale in-
dividuals to conceptual objects described by symbolic data, such as categorical multi-valued
data, interval-valued data, modal data, etc., and to extend classical statistical methods or de-
velop new approaches for multivariate analysis on symbolic data. As a main topic in symbolic
data analysis, clustering methods on symbolic data, especially on interval-valued data, has
aroused much attention in recent years (Diday and Brito, 1989; Bock, 2002; Chavent et al.,
2006; De Carvalho, 2007; Costa et al., 2010).
