Graph Aggregation : Application to Social Networks
Amine Louati∗ Marie-Aude Aufaure∗∗
Yves Lechevallier∗∗∗
∗University Paris-Dauphine - Lamsade,
Place du Maréchal de Lattre de Tassigny, F-75775 Paris 16 cedex, France
Amine.louati@dauphine.lamsade.fr
∗∗Laboratoire MAS Ecole Centrale de Paris Grande Voie des Vignes
Chatenay-Malabry, France
Marie-Aude.Aufaure@ecp.fr,
∗∗∗INRIA-Rocquencourt,Domaine de Voluceau 78150 Rocquencourt
Yves.Lechevallier@inria.fr
Abstract. In the enterprise context, people need to exploit and mainly visual-
ize different types of interactions between heterogeneous objects. Graph model
seems to be the most appropriate way to represent those interactions. However,
the extracted graphs have in general a huge size which makes it difficult to ana-
lyze and visualize. An aggregation step is needed to have more understandable
graphs in order to allow users discovering underlying information and hidden
relationships between entities. In this work, we propose new measures to evalu-
ate the quality of summaries based on an existing algorithm named k-SNAP that
produces a summarized graph according to user-selected node attributes and re-
lationships.
1 Introduction
Data manipulated in an enterprise context are structured data as well as unstructured con-
tent such as e-mails, documents, etc. Graphs are a natural way of representing and modeling
such data in a unified manner (structured semi-structured and unstructured ones). The main ad-
vantage of such structure resides in its dynamic aspect and its capability to represent relations,
even multiple ones, between objects. People need to visualize different types of interactions
between heterogeneous objects (e.g. product and site, customers and products, people inter-
action like social networks, etc.). In order to analyze these interactions and facilitate their
visualization, it is relevant to modulate such interaction by using a graph structure.
However, graphs extracted are often large, with thousands or even millions of nodes and
edges. As a result, it is almost impossible to understand the information encoded in these
graphs by mere visual inspection. In order, to facilitate the visualization and data interpreta-
tion, it seems interesting to perform an operation of summarization. The objective of graph
summarization is to produce small and understandable summaries and can highlight commu-
nities in the network, which greatly facilitates the interpretation. Today, summarization has
