Hierarchical Mixed Topological Maps
Ndèye Niang∗, Mory Ouattara ∗,∗∗
∗Laboratoire CEDRIC, CNAM 292, rue Saint Martin, 75141 Paris Cedex 03, France,
n-deye.niang_keita@cnam.fr,
http://cedric.cnam.fr
∗∗Centre Scientifique et Technique du Bâtiment, 84 Avenue Jean Jaurès, 77420
Champs-sur-Marne
mory.ouattara@cstb.fr,
http://cedric.cnam.fr
Abstract. We address the problem of clustering individuals described with sev-
eral mixed variables divided in homogeneous blocks. We propose a hierarchical
method with two levels to partition the individuals. The method is based on two
successive steps using mixed topological maps combined with agglomerative hi-
erarchical clustering. The proposed approach allows to take into account simul-
taneously qualitative and quantitative variables as well as the variable blocking.
A real example on indoor air quality illustrates the proposed method.
1 Introduction
Clustering analysis is probably one of the most widely used statistical tools in data mining.
In various applications in engineering, biology, business and social sciences classical cluster-
ing methods as well as new approaches are more and more used to reduce huge transactional
and experimental data. These data are often column partitioned, as the variables are divided in
several homogeneous and meaningful blocks. For example in biology or chemistry experimen-
tal analysis, a data block may consist of a set of measurement variables which refer to the same
type of instrument or method used for the analysis; alternatively, a block may contain variables
having biological similarity. In the indoor air quality study which illustrates the method we
propose, several questionnaires related to different possible causes of pollution have been ful-
filled separately. The resulting data sets contains a combination of categorical and continuous
variables, we refer to them as mixed data sets.
The general problem addressed in this paper is discovering unknown homogenous groups
of observations keeping into account the multiblock structure of the data. We propose a hi-
erarchical approach with two levels of clustering using agglomerative hierarchical clustering
combined with mixed topological maps (MTM ) (Lebbah et al., 2005), a modified version
of self organizing map (SOM ) (Kohonen, 1982, 1995, 1998) for mixed variables. The first
step clusters each initial block of variables separately providing local partitions (ie according
to each block). In the second step, based on the results of the former one, the different local
partitions are combined into a single global one. The aim of this approach, called hierarchi-
cal mixed topological map (HMTM ) is interpreting block-specific patterns of heterogeneity
