Multiple Linear Regression for Histogram Data
using Least Squares of Quantile Functions:
a Two-components model.
Rosanna Verde∗, Antonio Irpino∗
∗ Dipartimento di Scienze Politiche ”J. Monnet“
Seconda Universitá degli Studi di Napoli
Viale Eliitico 31, Caserta, Italy
rosanna.verde@unina2.it, antonio.irpino@unina2.it
Abstract. Histograms are commonly used for representing summaries of ob-
served data and they can be considered non parametric estimates of probabi-
lity distributions. Symbolic Data Analysis formalized the concept of histogram
symbolic variable, as a variable which allows to describe statistical units by hi-
stograms instead of single values. In this paper we present a linear regression
model for multivariate histogram variables. We use a Least Square estimation
method where the sum of squared errors is defined according to the `2 Wasser-
stein metric between the observed and the predicted histogram data. Consistently
with the l2 Wasserstein metric, we solve the Least Square computational prob-
lem by introducing a suitable inner product between two vectors of histogram
data. Finally, measures of goodness of fit are discussed and an application on
real data shows some interpretative advantages of the proposed method.
1 Introduction
Symbolic Data Analysis (SDA) is a relatively new statistical approach concerning the anal-
ysis of higher level individuals (like typologies, classes or concepts) that are described by
multi-valued variables (Bock and Diday (2000); Diday and Noirhomme-Fraiture (2008)).
The term symbolic variable was coined in order to introduce such new set-valued descriptions.
In a classic data table (n×p individuals per variables) each individual is described by a vector of
values, similarly, in a symbolic data table each individual is described by a vector of set-valued
descriptions (like intervals of values, histograms, set of numbers or of categories, sometimes
equipped with weights, probabilities, frequencies, an so on). According to the taxonomy of
symbolic variables presented in Bock and Diday (2000) we may consider as numerical sym-
bolic variables all those symbolic variables whose support is numeric. The main quantitative
and multi-valued symbolic variable types are interval and modal numeric symbolic variable.
Linear regression models allow to modeling the linear relationship between a quantitative re-
sponse symbolic variable and a set of independent or explicative quantitative symbolic variables
of the same type. Regression models for interval data extend the classic linear model to inter-
val variables (see Afonso et al. (2008) and Lima Neto and de Carvalho (2010)) and the therein
