Principal Component Analysis of Functional Data based on
Constant Numerical Characteristics
Meiling Chen∗,∗∗ Huiwen Wang∗,∗∗
∗School of Economics and Management, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
∗∗Research Center of Complex Data Analysis, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
mlchen@foxmail.com,
Abstract. A new approach to principal component analysis (PCA) is proposed
for functional data. In prevailing methods of functional principal component
analysis (FPCA), the definition of a mean is in the form of a function. How-
ever, data centralisation based on this kind of mean actually obtains a residual
function. The result of FPCA, given its matrix of residual functions, may thus
fail to present the essential variation of the original data. Besides, applications in
FPCA are mainly for types of one sample problems. Numerical characteristics of
functional data are defined as real constants. Centralisation in terms of constant
numerical characteristics implies the relocation of the entire matrix of functional
variances in order to obtain original curves whose centres of gravity are settled
on the origin. Furthermore, based on the covariance matrix obtained from con-
stant numerical characteristics, functional principal components for multivariate
sample problems are proposed. Conclusions are validated by simulation in a real
situation.
1 Introduction
We propose an extension of principal component analysis (PCA) for classical data to func-
tional data. Functional data analysis (FDA) was first introduced by Ramsay (1982). Later,
Ramsay and Silverman (2005) provided a thorough treatment of FDA. In contrast to classical
statistical methodology, FDA treats an entire sequence of measurements for an individual as
a single functional entity rather than a set of discrete values. Treating the data as a function
retains all of the information contained in the data.
We will focus on PCA of functional data. PCA for functional data (FPCA) is described in
full by Ramsay and Silverman (2005). Each functional principal component (FPC) represents
a particular movement pattern over the time interval considered and represents variation of
all the observations around the mean. More recently, FPCA based on the Karhunen-Loeve
decomposition has been successfully applied in many areas. Locantore et al. (1999) explored
abnormalities in the curvature of the cornea in the human eye. Viviani et al. (2005) compared
its functional and multivariate versions and discovered that the functional approach offers a
rather better image of experimental manipulations underlying the data. These investigations
have time as the covariate. Kneip and Utikal (2001) applied FPCA to describe a set of density
curves where the covariate is income. These applications are for types of problems in one
