Symbolic Principal Components for Interval-Valued Data
L. Billard∗, J. Le-Rademacher∗∗
∗Department of Statistics, University of Georgia USA
lynne@stat.uga.edu
∗∗Division of Biostatistics, Medical College of Wisconsin USA
jlerade@mcw.edu
Abstract. The centers method (Cazes et al., 1997, Chouakria, 1998) was the
first principal component analysis for interval-valued data (where it is implic-
itly assumed that values within an interval are uniformly distributed across that
interval). Many other methods have since been proposed. All fail in various
ways to capture fully all the information contained in the data. Here, we set
these in context against a new method which calculates the covariance matrix
exactly. This new method also includes a new visualization of the projection of
the observations onto the principal component space.
1 Introduction
There have been a number of methods proposed in the literature for obtaining principal
components for interval-valued data. More recently, Le-Rademacher and Billard (2012) has
developed a so-called symbolic covariance principal component analysis for such data, based
on the exact calculation of the covariance matrix which matrix is fundamental to any principal
component methodology. A brief description of the standard principal component methodol-
ogy is provided in Section 2.1. After describing the calculation of this exact covariance matrix
in Section 2.2, we review in Section 2.3 the various methods that currently exist against the
backdrop of that exact covariance matrix. Then, in Section 3, we illustrate the new symbolic
covariance principal component analysis method on the familiar oils data (Ichino, 1988). A
new visualization of the resulting projections of the observations onto the principal component
space based on polytopes is also shown. One consequence of the polytope projections is that
the separation of the observations is better than when the traditional maximal covering area
rectangles are used. Finally, in Section 4, we provide a symbolic-valued output of the princi-
pal components which better explains the output more accurately than that obtained using the
maximal covering area rectangles.
2 Background
2.1 Standard Principal Component Analysis
Let Y = (Y1, . . . , Yp) be random variables taking values in Rp. The basic idea behind
a principal component analysis is to transform the p-dimensional observations into a set of s-
