A Passive Interoperability Testing Approach Applied to the
Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP)
Nanxing Chen, César Viho
IRISA/University of Rennes 1
Campus de Beaulieu, 263 avenue du Général Leclerc
35042, Rennes, France
{nanxing.chen, cesar.viho}@irisa.fr,
http://www.irisa.fr/
Abstract. Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP) is an application protocol
designed for the Internet of Things, where smart devices cooperate to provide
machine-to-machine Web services. In this context, a high level of interoperabil-
ity is crucial. This paper addresses the interoperability testing of CoAP applica-
tions. It proposes a methodology based on passive testing, which is a technique
to test a running system by only observing its behavior without introducing any
test input. The methodology (the proposed method and a corresponding test-
ing tool) was put into operation during the CoAP interoperability testing event
(Plugtest) organized by ETSI in Paris in March 2012, where a number of CoAP
applications were successfully tested, showing the validity and efficiency of this
approach.
1 Introduction
Internet of Things (IoT) is an integrated part of future Internet and could be defined as
a dynamic global network infrastructure with self configuring capabilities based on standard
and interoperable communication protocols where physical and virtual things use intelligent
interfaces, and are seamlessly integrated into the information networks. One of the objectives
of the IoT is using the captured information by smart objects (e.g. automation systems, mobile
personal gadgets, building-automation devices, cellular terminals, the smart grid, etc.) to im-
prove peoples life in a large range of fields: healthcare, environment monitoring, smart energy
control, industrial automation and manufacturing, logistics, etc. Promoted by IoT, more and
more devices are becoming connected and benefit from interacting with each other to achieve
cooperative services. Over the next decade, this could grow to trillions of embedded devices
and will greatly increase the Internet’s size and scope. On the other hand, the evolution of tech-
nologies also brings challenges: devices behind Machine-to-Machine (M2M) applications are
generally have limited resources. Typically, they are battery-powered and frequently asleep,
limiting them to an average consumption on the order of micro-watts. Power limitations also
lead to constraints on available networking. Most devices connect wirelessly as stringing wires
are prohibitively expensive and sometimes not applicable. In consequence, packet losses might
occur during data transfer.
- 1 -
