Biological event extraction using SVM
and composite kernel function
Maha Amami∗, Aymen Elkhlifi∗∗, Rim Faiz∗∗∗
∗LARODEC, ISG de Tunis, 2000, Le Bardo, Tunisie
MahaAmami@isg.rnu.tn,
∗∗LaLIC, Université Paris-Sorbonne, 28, rue Serpente, 75006 Paris, France
Aymen.Elkhlifi@paris4.sorbonne.fr
∗∗∗LARODEC, IHEC de Carthage, 2016, Carthage Présidence, Tunisie
Rim.Faiz@ihec.rnu.tn
Abstract. With an overwhelming of experimental and computational results in
molecular biology, there is an increasing interest to provide tools that will auto-
matically extract structured biological information recorded in freely available
text. Extraction of named entities such as protein, gene or disease names and
of simple relations of these entities, such as statements of protein-protein inter-
actions has gained certain success, and now the new focus research has been
moving to higher level of information extraction such as co-reference resolution
and event extraction. It is precisely the last of these tasks which will be focused
in this paper. The biological event template allows detailed representations of
complex natural language statements, which is specified by a trigger and argu-
ments labeled by semantic roles.
In this paper, we have developed a biological event extraction approach which
uses Support Vector Machines (SVM) and a suitable composite kernel function
to identify triggers and to assign the corresponding arguments. Also, we make
use of a number of features based on both syntactic and contextual information
which where automatically learned from the training data.
We implemented our event extraction system using the state-of-the-art of NLP
tools. We achieved competitive results compared to the BioNLP’09 Shared task
benchmark.
1 Introduction
The past decade has seen an explosive growth in the amount of experimental and computa-
tional biological data. This growth is accompanied by an increase in the number of biological
texts discussing the results. The MEDLINE 1 database contains in 2010 over 20 million arti-
cles, and the database is currently growing at a rate of more than 10% each year (Ananiadou
and al., 2006). The availability of huge textual resources provides the scientists with the chance
1. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
- 101 -
