Classification topologique probabiliste pour des données
catégorielles
Nicoleta Rogovschi et Mohamed Nadif∗
LIPADE, Université Paris Descartes
45, rue des Saints Pères, 75006 Paris, France
Prénom.Nom@parisdescartes.fr
Résumé. Cet article présente une carte auto-organisatrice probabiliste pour l’ana-
lyse et la classification topologique des données catégorielles. En considérant un
modèle de mélanges parcimonieux nous introduisons une nouvelle carte auto-
organisatrice (SOM) probabiliste. L’estimation des paramètres de notre modèle
est réalisée à l’aide de l’algorithme EM classique. Contrairement à SOM, l’al-
gorithme d’apprentissage proposé optimise une fonction objective. Ces perfor-
mances ont été évaluées sur des données réelles et les résultats obtenus sont
encourageants et prometteurs à la fois pour la classification et pour la modélisa-
tion.
1 Introduction
Data visualization is an important step in the exploratory phase of data analysis. This step
is more difficult when it involves binary data and categorical variables (Andreopoulos et al.,
2006; Saund, 1995). Self-organizing maps are being increasingly used as tools for visualiza-
tion, as they allow projection over small areas that are generally two dimensional. The basic
model proposed by (Kohonen, 2001), was only designed for numerical data, but it has been
successfully applied to treating textual data, (Kaski et al., 1998). This algorithm has also been
applied to binary data following transformation of the original data (Ibbou et Cottrell, 1995;
Lebbah et al., 2000). Developing generative models of the Kohonen map has long been an
important goal. These models vary in the form of the interactions, and they assume the hid-
den generators may follow in generating the observations. Some extensions and reformulations
of the Kohonen model have been described in the literature. They include probabilistic self-
organizing maps (Anouar et al., 1997) which define a map as a gaussian mixture and use the
maximum likelihood approach to define an iterative algorithm.
In Verbeek et al. (2005), the authors propose a probabilistic generalization of Kohonen’s
SOMwhich maximizes the variational free-energy that sums data log-likelihood and Kullback-
Leibler divergence between a normalized neighbourhood function and the posterior distribu-
tion on the given data for the components. We have also Soft topographic vector quantization
(STVQ), which uses some measure of divergence between data items and cells to minimize a
new error function (Heskes, 2001; Graepel et al., 1998). Another model, often presented as the
probabilistic version of the self-organizing map, is the Generative Topographic Map (GTM)
(Bishop et al., 1998; Kaban et Girolami, 2001). However, the manner in which GTM achieves
- 359 -
