Community Detection in Social Networks with Attribute and
Relationship Data
The Anh Dang, Emmanuel Viennet∗
∗L2TI - Institut Galilée - Université Paris-Nord
99, avenue Jean-Baptiste Clément - 93430 Villetaneuse - France
{theanh.dang,emmanuel.viennet}@univ-paris13.fr
1 Community Detection Algorithms
We present two methods to discover communities in an attributed graph, given a similarity
measure. An attributed graph is denoted as G = (V,E,X), where V is the set of nodes, E is
set of edges, X = X1, ..., Xd is the set of d attributes associated with the nodes in V . Each
node vi is associated with an attribute vector (x1i , ..., x
d
i ).
a)Algorithm SAC1
In this algorithm, we first define a composite modularityQ as an extension of Newman’s well-
known modularity function (Clauset et al. (2004))
Q =
∑
C
∑
i,j∈C
(
α · 1
2m
·
(
Gi,j − di · dj
2m
)
+ (1− α) · simA(i, j)
)
α is the weighting factor, 0 ≤ α ≤ 1, simA(i, j) is the attribute similarity of the nodes
(i, j). To find an approximate optimization of Q, we follow an approach directly inspired by
the Louvain algorithm (Blondel et al. (2008)). The algorithm starts with each node belonging
to a separated community. A node is then chosen randomly. The algorithm tries to move this
node from its current community. If a positive gain is found, the node is then placed to the
community with the maximum gain. Otherwise, it stays in its original community. This step
is applied repeatedly until no more improvement is achieved. The first phase is completed
when there is no more positive gain by moving of nodes. Next, we can reapply this phase
by grouping the nodes in the same communities to a new community-node. To determine the
attribute similarity between two communities, we propose two approaches. The first is to sum
up the similarity of their members, the second way is to set to the similarity of their centroids.
b)Algorithm SAC2
Our first algorithm SAC1 repetitively checks all nodes, leading toO(n2) complexity. To reduce
the computational cost, we propose another approach that only makes use of a node’s nearest
neighbors. Given an attributed graph : G = (V,E,X), we define a k-nearest neighbor graph
(k-NN) Gk = (V,Ek) as a graph in which each node has exactly k edges, connecting to its k
most similar neighbors in G. The similarity measure between 2 nodes i and j is defined as
S(i, j) = α ·Gi,j + (1− α) · simA(i, j)
- 515 -
