Development of a distributed recommender system using the
Hadoop Framework
Raja Chiky, Renata Ghisloti, Zakia Kazi Aoul
LISITE-ISEP
28 rue Notre Dame Des Champs
75006 Paris
firstname.lastname@isep.fr
Abstract. Producing high quality recommendations has become a challenge in
the recent years. Indeed, the growth in the quantity of data involved in the rec-
ommendation process pose some scalability and effectiveness problems. These
issues have encouraged the research of new technologies. Instead of develop-
ing a new recommender system we improve an already existing method. A dis-
tributed framework was considered based on the known quality and simplicity of
the MapReduce project. The Hadoop Open Source project played a fundamental
role in this research. It undoubtedly encouraged and facilitated the construction
of our application, supplying all tools needed. Our main goal in this research was
to prove that building a distributed recommender system was not only possible,
but simple and productive.
1 Introduction
The amount of information in the web has greatly increased in the past decade. This phe-
nomenon has promoted the advance of the recommender systems research area. The aim of
Recommender Systems is providing personalized recommendations. They help users by sug-
gesting useful items to them, usually dealing with enormous amounts of data. Amazon, for
example, that has incorporated recommender systems to personalize the online store for each
user, has recorded in 2003 more than 29 million users and several million catalog items Linden
et al. (2003).
Many recommender systems approaches have been developed in the past decade, but a
considerable amount of them were constructed and evaluated with small datasets. Furthermore,
the volume of web information has greatly increased in the last years, and for that, several
recommender systems suffer from performance and scalability problems when dealing with
larger datasets.
Our main goal in this paper is describing a method to possibly overcome these issues.
We propose a distributed recommender system, and we intend to demonstrate that it could be
easily developed and present good results. We chose The Slope One Lemire and Maclachlan
(2005) as recommender algorithm and we study the MapReduce Dean and Ghemawat project
to construct such distributed system.
- 275 -
