Relational Learning from Spatial Data:
Retrospect and Prospect
Donato Malerba∗
∗University of Bari
malerba@di.uniba.it ,
http://www.di.uniba.it/~malerba/
Summary
Learning from spatial data is characterized by two main features. First, spatial objects have
a locational property which implicitly defines several spatial relationships (topological, direc-
tional, distancebased) between objects. Second, attributes of spatially related units tend to be
statistically correlated. These two features argue against the assumption of the independent
generation of data samples (i.i.d. assumption) underlying classic machine learning algorithms,
and motivate the application of relational learning algorithms, whose inferences are based on
both instance properties and relations between data. This relational learning approach to spa-
tial domains has already been investigated in the last decade, and important accomplishments
in this direction have already been performed. In this talk, we retrospectively survey major
achievements on relational learning from spatial data and we report open problems which still
challenges researchers and prospectively suggest important topics for incorporation into a re-
search agenda.
Bibliography
Donato Malerba is a full professor at the Department of Informatics, University of Bari,
where he teaches in the courses of "Algorithms and Data Structures", "Advanced Data Base
Systems", and "Knowledge Bases and Data Mining". In 1992 he was assistant specialist at the
Institute of Computer Science, University of California, Irvine. His research activity mainly
concerns machine learning and data mining, in particular numeric-symbolic methods for in-
ductive inference, classification and model trees, (multi-)relational data mining, spatial data
mining, web mining, and their applications to intelligent document processing and digital map
interpretation. He has published more than 150 papers in international journals and conference
proceedings. He was in the Management Board of the European Coordinated Action FP6-
021321 "KDUbiq - Knowledge Discovery in Ubiquitous Environments" (December 2005 -
May 2008) and in the Management Board of the European project IST-2001-33086 "KDNet
- European Knowledge Discovery Network of Excellence" (2002 - 2004). He participated to
several European and National projects. He was responsible of the unit of Bari in the Euro-
pean project IST-1999-10536 SPIN (Spatial Mining on Data of Public Interest) and in two
- 5 -
