Topological Decomposition and Heuristics for High Speed
Clustering of Complex Networks
Faraz Zaidi∗, Guy Melançon∗∗
∗Karachi Institute of Economics and Technology (KIET)
Korangi Creek, Karachi, 75190, Pakistan
faraz@pafkiet.edu.pk
∗∗CNRS UMR 5800 LaBRI & INRIA Bordeaux - Sud Ouest
351, cours de la Libération, 33405 Talence cedex, FRANCE
guy.melancon@labri.fr
Abstract. With the exponential growth in the size of data and networks, de-
velopment of new and fast techniques to analyze and explore these networks is
becoming a necessity. Moreover the emergence of scale free and small world
properties in real world networks has stimulated lots of activity in the field of
network analysis and data mining. Clustering remains a fundamental technique
to explore and organize these networks. A challenging problem is to find a clus-
tering algorithm that works well in terms of clustering quality and is efficient in
terms of time complexity.
In this paper, we propose a fast clustering algorithm which combines some
heuristics with a Topological Decomposition to obtain a clustering. The algo-
rithm which we call Topological Decomposition and Heuristics for Clustering
(TDHC) is highly efficient in terms of asymptotic time complexity as compared
to other existing algorithms in the literature. We also introduce a number of
Heuristics to complement the clustering algorithm which increases the speed of
the clustering process maintaining the high quality of clustering. We show the
effectiveness of the proposed clustering method on different real world data sets
and compare its results with well known clustering algorithms.
1 Introduction
Most real world systems take the form of networks where a set of nodes and edges might be
used to represent these networks. Examples include social networks, metabolic networks, food
web, transport networks (Newman (2003)). Clustering remains an important technique towards
the better exploration and organization of these networks. In terms of networks representing
real world data, a cluster can be defined as a group of nodes which are similar or connected
in some predefined sense and dissimilar to nodes belonging to the other clusters (Schaeffer
(2007)). Detection of clusters has a wide range of applications in various fields. For example,
in social networks, clustering could lead us towards a better comprehension of the interactions
taking place between people, or for biological networks, a useful application of clustering is in
the identification of biomarkers in a protein-protein interaction network.
- 83 -
