Summarizing former sessions for user-centric OLAP
Julien Aligon∗, Patrick Marcel∗
∗Laboratoire d’Informatique – Université François Rabelais Tours, France
{firstname.lastname}@univ-tours.fr
Abstract. We propose a framework for summarizing former analyses to assist
the user exploring a data cube. In this framework, simple operators are used
for automatically summarizing log files consisted of sequences of unevaluated
OLAP queries. We provide a simple implementation of the framework for sum-
marizing logs of OLAP queries, and we test it with respect to a query personal-
ization technique based on mining a query log.
1 Introduction
It is commonly acknowledged that analysing data cubes using OLAP for navigating is a
tedious task Sarawagi et al. (1998); Sarawagi (1999). On the other hand, it is also admitted that
leveraging the knowledge captured by former issued queries, usually stored in the DB query
log, constitute a valuable assistance to the user when formulating new queries Khoussainova
et al. (2009).
For instance, in the context of scientific databases, where relational databases and SQL
are used for conducting analytical sessions over huge repositories of data Khoussainova et al.
(2010), it has recently been shown that looking at former sessions over the database helps
users to organize new analytical sessions for better exploring the database Khoussainova et al.
(2011).
To support the analytical exploration of data warehouses, we propose in this paper to sum-
marize former analyses to better present them to the user. More precisely, our contribution is
threefold: 1) we introduce a simple logical framework for summarizing query logs consisting
of sets of sessions of OLAP queries, 2) we propose an implementation of this framework, and
3) we evaluate our approach for user-centric OLAP by testing it with respect to a personaliza-
tion technique based on mining a query log Aligon et al. (2011a).
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly comments related work. Section 3
introduces the basic definitions for cube, queries and log. Section 4 presents our logical frame-
work, while its implementation is presented Section 5. Section 6 describes the experiment we
run for evaluating our approach. Section 7 concludes the paper and discusses perspectives.
2 Related work
User-centric approaches for assisting the user in her analyses, like recommendation and
personalization, are getting more and more attention, in the domain of relational databases
