Evolving informal risk-sharing cooperatives and
other-regarding preferences
Renaud Bourlès∗, Juliette Rouchier∗∗
∗ École Centrale Marseille (Aix-Marseille School of Economics)
CNRS & EHESS
38 rue Frédéric Joliot-Curie
13451 Marseille Cedex 20, France
renaud.bourles@centrale-marseille.fr
∗∗Aix-Marseille University (Aix-Marseille School of Economics)
CNRS & EHESS
Centre de la Vieille Charité
2 rue de la Charité
13236 Marseille Cedex 02, France
juliette.rouchier@univ-amu.fr
Abstract. In this paper we present a model of formation and destruc-
tion of informal cooperatives in a population of agents who perform a risky
activity and who are heterogeneous in terms of success in their actions. Al-
though some agents have high-risk and others low-risk, our model displays
a dynamics with cooperatives in which agents share equally their income
with a certain stability. We are interested in studying at the same time the
existence of cooperatives, their ability to integrate a large proportion of
agents and the degree of segregation of these cooperatives. Three factors
can explain the existence, stability and lack of segregation. First, we show
that the classical explanation in economics holds within the framework
of our model: when agents are risk averse, high success agents can share
with low success agents so that to stabilize the value of their income - the
higher the risk aversion, the more stable the cooperatives and the lower
the segregation. Learning can explain in a small proportion the existence
of cooperatives: we designed agents so that they have to learn whether
they are high or low-risk, and while they are learning, they tend to create
cooperatives that can last. Eventually we worked on the integration of
other-regarding preferences in the model, with two different definitions.
As expected, the influence of other-regarding preferences is to increase
stability and decrease segregation, and the two models of rationality react
differently to the type of network in which the agents are immersed. This
paper, mainly exploratory, presents our model and shows the influence
of the definition of network as well as all other factors presented before.
In that sense, although we have mainly done a rough exploration of its
