Setting bounds in a homogeneous corpus:
a methodological study applied to medieval
literature
Jean–Baptiste Camps∗, Florian Cafiero∗∗
∗Laboratoire Études et édition de textes médiévaux (EA 4349)
Université Paris – Sorbonne
1, rue Victor Cousin
75005 Paris
Jean-Baptiste.Camps@paris-sorbonne.fr
http://www.paris-sorbonne.fr/
∗∗École centrale de Paris
Grande voie des Vignes
92295 Châtenay-Malabry CEDEX
florian.cafiero@polytechnique.edu
http://polytechnique.academia.edu/FlorianCafiero
Abstract. The authors present here an exploratory and unspecific method
that does not necessitate any a priori on the data – or any heavy trans-
formation such as lemmatisation– that would have to be understood as
a first step in the apprehension of a corpus. After a first phase of calibra-
tion, based on a control sample, the authors will introduce a method which
heuristic value is to bring out, at different levels, internal divisions of dif-
ferent kinds (diachronic, diatopic, related to authorship or scribes,. . . ),
that can then be analysed specifically. The authors illustrate this method
by applying it to a corpus of Occitan medieval texts, the vidas. The cor-
pus’s authors and origins are in good part unknown.
1 A peculiar corpus: the vidas
1.1 Elements of context
Amongst the relatively small corpus of Occitan prose literature from the XIIIth
century that has survived to this day, the vidas, along with the razos, constitute a corpus
of roughly 225 texts known as the “biographies” of the troubadours since Raynouard’s
edition in 1820. Several debates surround these texts’ origin: were they performed at
first or were they created specifically to be integrated into manuscripts? Did they appear
in Northern Italy or do they come from an older Languedocian tradition? Despite the
lack of medieval unambiguous vocabulary, there is an apparent distinction between
commentaries, explanation of a specific poem (a razo), and more general biographical
narratives detached from a specific work (vidas as we call them).
