Spatial correlation in bipartite networks: the impact
of the geographical distances on the relations in a
corpus of medieval transactions
Nathalie Villa-Vialaneix∗, Bertrand Jouve∗∗
Fabrice Rossi∗, Florent Hautefeuille∗∗∗
∗SAMM, Université Paris 1, 90 rue de Tolbiac, 75013 Paris - France
{nathalie.villa,fabrice.rossi}@univ-paris1.fr,
http://www.nathalievilla.org, http://www.apiacoa.org
∗∗Laboratoire ERIC-IXXI, Université Lumière Lyon 2
5 avenue Pierre Mendès-France, 69676 Bron cedex - France
bertrand.jouve@univ-lyon2.fr
http://eric.univ-lyon2.fr/∼bjouve/BER_FR.html
∗∗∗TRACES, Université Toulouse 2
5, allées Antonio Machado, 31058 Toulouse Cedex 9 - France
florent.hautefeuille@univ-tlse2.fr
http://w3.terrae.univ-tlse2.fr/spip/spip.php?article35
Abstract. In this article, the influence between a spatial information
and interactions between individuals is addressed. This issue is illustrated
through the analysis of a corpus of notarial acts established during the
Middle Ages. In this corpus, the persons interact in common transactions
that are geolocalized. The present work tries to quantify the impact of
this spatial information on the relations between people. As the spatial
information as well as the relations between individuals are derived from
the same source (the transactions in which the individuals have been
involved), a standard Mantel test (Mantel, 1967) is not suited to address
this issue. A similar methodology, based on the adaptation of the original
permutation test, is thus proposed and illustrated in that context. 1
1 Introduction
Relational models are increasingly used as a theoretical framework in a number of
real life situations. Indeed, “graphs” are useful models to mathematically describe co-
expression networks and metabolic pathways (biology), social relationships, computer
networks or any other kind of data where the objects under study, the “entities”, are
related to each others by a given type of relation (Dorogovtsev and Mendes, 2003;
Newman et al., 2006). In the simplest case, the graph is made of N nodes (or vertices)
V = {x1, . . . , xN}, each one representing an entity, and a set of edges E ⊂ V × V ,
1. This work is partially supported by ANR ModULand (Programme blanc SHS 1 2011 0).
