Feedback - Study and Improvement of
the Random Forest of the Mahout library in
the context of marketing data of Orange
C. Thao∗,∗∗, N. Voisine∗, V. Lemaire∗, R. Trinquart∗
∗ Orange Labs, 2 avenue Pierre Marzin, 22300 Lannion, France
∗∗Predicsis, 5 rue de Broglie, 22300 Lannion, France
Abstract. In the realm of Big Data systems, Hadoop has emerged as one of the
most popular systems and a very diverse ecosystem has grown around it, meet-
ing all kinds of functional and technical needs. One niche that should have been
a place of choice in this ecosystem is data analytics: first because getting value
out of large datasets requires efficient Machine Learning (ML) algorithms, sec-
ond because large clusters with abundant CPUs resources seem like appropriate
playfields for ML algorithms which are often very resource-intensive computing
tasks. Unfortunately among the myriad of open source projects, there are very
few data analytics tools that have been ported to the Hadoop framework. Apache
Mahout stands out among those rare initiatives: this project is mainly known for
its recommendation application, but it also offers a warehouse of ML algorithms,
advertised to run on Map/Reduce. We did investigate the twenty algorithms pro-
posed within Mahout and in this report we focus on the most promising one: the
Random Forest implementation. Relying on extensive tests, including specific
marketing data from Orange, we provide an in-depth feedback on the use of this
tool, both from a practical and theoretical perspective, and we suggest several
improvements.
1 Introduction
The decreasing cost of data storage has led to the accumulation of large and complex
datasets, which are widely seen as new opportunities for business. Orange - a multinational
telecommunications corporation - has to analyze the data of its network to improve profitability
and create new services. To give a sense of scale, in order to increase customer satisfaction on
services, Orange has to analyze Quality of Services (QoS) and Quality of Experience (QoE)
indicators for its 150 million of mobile customers. Those QoS and QoE indicators result from
the combination of different data sources (network probe, SI). The main purpose consists in
real time detection or prediction of QoS or QoE. This would allow Orange either to improve
quality of network or to provide new services based on QoE. Therefore applying data min-
ing techniques to these vast amounts of data is crucial. This raises numerous issues such as
scalability of data mining algorithms, automation of the data mining process and control of
over-fitting.
- 413 -
