A survey of query recommendation techniques for
datawarehouse exploration
Patrick Marcel∗, Elsa Negre∗∗
∗Université François Rabelais Tours, Laboratoire d’Informatique, France
patrick.marcel@univ-tours.fr,
∗∗ LINA (UMR CNRS 6241) - Nantes University, France
elsa.negre@univ-nantes.fr
Abstract. Lots of data are gathered in datawarehouses that are navigated and
explored for analytical purposes. Only recently has the problem of recommend-
ing a datawarehouse query to a datawarehouse user attracted attention. In this
paper, we propose a simple formal framework for expressing datawarehouse
query recommendations. We propose to see the problem of recommending a
datawarehouse query for exploration purposes as a function computing a set
of queries and associated ratings given a query log, a session, a user profile, a
datawarehouse instance, and an expectation function. The rating computed indi-
cates the usefulness of each query for a session. With this viewpoint, we review
and categorize the few techniques that, to the best of our knowledge, have been
proposed and we illustrate them with a case study.
1 Introduction
Lots of data are gathered and shared in databases that are navigated and explored for an-
alytical purposes. Only recently has the problem of recommending a database query to a
database user attracted attention (Chatzopoulou et al., 2009; Khoussainova et al., 2009; Ste-
fanidis et al., 2009). However, in other contexts (like e.g., e-commerce or web search) the
problem of computing recommendations is deeply investigated (Adomavicius and Tuzhilin,
2005; Baeza-Yates, 2010).
A typical example of database analysis is a datawarehouse navigated by decision mak-
ers using OLAP queries (Sarawagi, 2000). A datawarehouse can be seen as a large database
with a particular topology, shared by many analysts who have various interest and viewpoints,
explored by sequences of queries. In such a context, query recommendation is particularly rel-
evant since the user is left with the tedious task of navigating a large datacube to find valuable
insight.
In this paper, we survey the existing methods for computing datawarehouse query recom-
mendations. We restrict the scope of this survey to methods that, given a user’s query over
a datawarehouse, use it or transform it into another query, with a supposed added value for
the user’s exploration. We propose a formal definition of this problem, namely to see the rec-
ommendation of datawarehouse queries for exploration purposes as a recommending function
