Closed-set-based Discovery of
Representative Association Rules Revisited
José L Balcázar, Cristina Tîrna˘uca˘
Departamento de Matemáticas, Estadística y Computación
Universidad de Cantabria, Santander, Spain
{joseluis.balcazar, cristina.tirnauca}@unican.es
Abstract. The output of an association rule miner is often huge in practice.
This is why several concise lossless representations have been proposed, such
as the “essential” or “representative” rules. We revisit the algorithm given by
Kryszkiewicz (Int. Symp. Intelligent Data Analysis 2001, Springer-Verlag LNCS
2189, 350–359) for mining representative rules. We show that its output is some-
times incomplete, due to an oversight in its mathematical validation, and we
propose an alternative complete generator that works within only slightly larger
running times.
1 Introduction
Association rule mining is among the most popular conceptual tools in the field of Data
Mining. We are interested in the process of discovering and representing regularities between
sets of items in large scale transactional data. Syntactically, the association rule representation
has the form of an implication, X → Y ; however, whereas in Logic such an expression is
true if and only if Y holds wheneverX does, an association rule is a partial implication, in the
sense that it is enough if Y holds most of the times X does.
To endow association rules with a definite semantics, we need to make precise how this
intuition of “most of the times” is formalized. There are many proposals for this formaliza-
tion. One of the frequently used measures of intensity of this kind of partial implication is its
confidence: the ratio between the number of transactions in which X and Y are seen together
and the number of transactions that contain X . In most application cases, the search space is
additionally restricted to association rules that meet a minimal support criterion, thus avoid-
ing the generation of rules from items that appear very seldom together in the dataset (formal
definitions of support and confidence are given in Section 2.1).
Many association rule miners exists, Apriori (see Agrawal et al. (1996)) being one of the
most widely discussed and used. The major problem shared by all mining algorithms is that,
in practice, even for reasonable support and confidence thresholds, the output is often huge.
Therefore, several concise lossless representations of the whole set of association rules have
been proposed. These representations are based on different notions of “redundancy”. In one
of these, a rule is redundant if it is possible to compute exactly its confidence and support
from other information such as the confidences and supports of other informative rules (see
