Entropic-Genetic Clustering
Mihaela Breaban∗, Henri Luchian∗, Dan A. Simovici∗∗
∗Univerity of Jassy, Dept. of Computer Science, Jassy, Romania,
e-mail:pmihaela,hluchian@infoiasi.ro
∗∗Univ. of Massachusetts Boston, Massachusetts 02125, USA,
e-mail:dsim@cs.umb.edu
Abstract. This paper addresses the clustering problem given the similarity ma-
trix of a dataset. We define two distinct criteria with the aim of simultaneously
minimizing the cut size and obtaining balanced clusters. The first criterion min-
imizes the similarity between objects belonging to different clusters and is an
objective generally met in clustering. The second criterion is formulated with
the aid of generalized entropy. The trade-off between these two objectives is
explored using a multi-objective genetic algorithm with enhanced operators.
1 Introduction
This paper addresses the clustering problem given the similarity matrix of a dataset. A
straightforward representation of the problem instance in this case is a weighted graph, having
the objects as vertices and weighted edges expressing the similarity between objects. This
leads to a graph clustering/partitioning problem which aims at identifying groups of strongly
inter-connected vertices. A survey of graph clustering is presented in Schaeffer (2007).
A similarity space is a pair (S,w), where w : S × S −→ R is a function such that
w(s, t) ≥ 0, w(s, t) = w(t, s), and w(s, s) = 1. for every s, t ∈ S. A similarity space (S,w)
can be regarded as a labelled graph G = (S,E,w), referred to as the similarity graph, where
the set of edges E is defined as E = {(si, sj) | si, sj ∈ S and w(si, sj) > 0}. If S is a finite
set S = {s1, . . . , sn}, the dissimilarity w is described by a symmetric matrix W ∈ Rn×n,
where wij = w(si, sj) for 1 ≤ i, j ≤ n.
A k-way clustering of a finite similarity space (S,w) is a partition κ = {C1, . . . , Ck} of
S. The sets C1, . . . , Ck are the clusters of κ. We seek a k-way partition of S, κ such that the
cut size (i.e. the sum of weights of edges between clusters in the similarity graph) is minimal,
and |Cp| ≈ |Cq|, for 1 ≤ p, q ≤ k, which means that the sizes of the clusters are as equal as
possible. Presentations of the state-of-the-art of graph clustering can be found in Fjällström
(1998), Karypis and Kumar (1998).
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 examines the two objectives which have to
be optimized as stated in the problem definition. Section 3 provides a brief survey on the
genetic algorithms for clustering with an emphasis on the multi-objective formulation; the
representation and the operators we used are detailed. Section 4 presents experimental results.
