Mobility, Data Mining and Privacy: Mining Human
Movement Patterns from Trajectory Data
Fosca Giannotti
IIIST "Alessandro Faedo" Italy
fosca.giannotti@isti.cnr.it
Summary
The technologies of mobile communications and ubiquitous computing pervade our so-
ciety, and wireless networks sense the movement of people and vehicles, generating large vo-
lumes of mobility data, such as mobile phone call records and GPS tracks. This is a scenario
of great opportunities and risks : on one side, mining this data can produce useful knowledge,
supporting sustainable mobility and intelligent transportation systems ; on the other side, in-
dividual privacy is at risk, as the mobility data contain sensitive personal information. A new
multidisciplinary research area is emerging at this crossroads of mobility, data mining, and
privacy. The talk assesses this research frontier from a data mining perspective, and illustrates
the results of a European-wide research project called GeoPKDD, Geographic Privacy-Aware
Knowledge Discovery and Delivery. GeoPKDD has created an integrated platform named M-
ATLAS for complex analysis of mobility data, which combines spatio-temporal querying ca-
pabilities with data mining, visual analytics and semantic technologies, thus providing a full
support for the Mobility Knowledge Discovery process. In this talk, we focus on the key data
mining models : trajectory patterns and trajectory clustering, and illustrate the analytical power
of our system in unvealing the complexity of urban mobility in a large metropolitan area by
means of a large scale experiment, based on a massive real life GPS dataset, obtained from
17,000 vehicles with on-board GPS receivers, tracked during one week of ordinary mobile
activity in the urban area of the city of Milan, Italy.
Bibliography
Fosca Giannotti is a senior researcher at the Information Science and Technology Insti-
tute of the National Research Council at Pisa, Italy. Her current research interests include
data mining query languages, knowledge discovery support environment, web-mining, spatio-
temporal reasoning, spatio-temporal data mining, and privacy preserving data mining. She has
been the coordinator of various European and national research projects and is currently the
co-ordinator of the FP6-IST project GeoPKDD : Geographic Privacy-aware Knowledge Dis-
covery and Delivery. She is member of steering committee of the FP7 European coordination
Action MODAP : Mobility, Data mining and Privacy. She has taught classes on databases
and data mining at universities in Italy and abroad. She is the author of more than one hun-
dred publications and served in the scientific committee of various conferences in the area of
