Linked Data Annotation and Fusion driven by Data Quality
Evaluation
Ioanna Giannopoulou(1), Fatiha Saïs(1) and Rallou Thomopoulos(2)
(1) LRI (Paris Sud University & CNRS)
Bât. 650 Ada Lovelace, F-91405 Orsay Cedex, France
(2) INRA-Supagro, LIRMM (Montpellier 2 University, CNRS & Inria)
2 place P. Viala, F-34060 Montpellier cedex 1, France
Résumé. In this work, we are interested in exploring the problem of data fu-
sion, starting from reconciled datasets whose objects are linked with semantic
sameAs relations. We attempt to merge the often conflicting information of these
reconciled objects in order to obtain unified representations that only contain the
best quality information.
1 Introduction
Data linking, also known as data reconciliation Ferrara et al. (2013); Saïs et al. (2009);
Pernelle et al. (2013), is the process where two object descriptions are examined in order to
determine whether they refer to the same real-world entity, and if so, to link them together.
Then, data fusion encompasses the effort to acquire a single homogenized object by merging
the information of the linked individual objects. The objects marked with the owl :sameAsmay
contain different, conflicting or inconsistent values in their properties. For each property the
most appropriate value must be chosen. The data fusion is an essential step towards avoiding
redundancy, grouping together the best quality information and giving consistent answers to
the users, in the linked data environment.
Research on the data fusion problem has begun over two decades ago in the field of relatio-
nal databases Bleiholder et Naumann (2008). However, as we examine the data fusion from the
RDF point of view, we notice that the specificities of RDF mechanisms cannot be reflected in
solutions offered by relational databases experts. Three main approaches have been proposed
for data fusion in RDF Saïs et Thomopoulos (2008); Saïs et al. (2010); Flouris et al. (2012);
Mendes et al. (2012). These different approaches attempt to evaluate the quality of each value,
by taking into account various measures based on the value itself and/or its metadata.
In this work, we are interested in exploring the problem of data fusion. Our method com-
bines different quality criteria based on the value and its data source, and exploits, whenever
possible the ontology semantics, constraints and relations. What is more, we create a mecha-
nism to provide explanations about the quality of each value, as estimated by our system. To
achieve this, we generate annotations used for traceability and explanation purposes.
Our approach is described in detail in Section 2. A first evaluation is presented in Section
3. Finally, Section 4 concludes the paper and gives some future work.
- 257 -
