Mining Classes by Multi-label Classification
Yuichiro KASE ∗, Takao MIURA∗∗
∗ Dept. of Advanced Sciences, yuichiro.kase.7n@stu.hosei.ac.jp
∗∗ Dept. of Elect. & Elect. Eng., miurat@hosei.ac.jp
HOSEI University
3-7-2 KajinoCho, Koganei, Tokyo, 184–8584 Japan
Résumé. We propose a new approach to mine potential classes in news do-
cuments by examining close relationship between new classes and probability
vectors of multiple labeling of the documents. Using EM algorithm to obtain the
distribution over linear mixture models, we make clustering and mine classes.
1 Motivation
Recently cloud systems through internet have been spread widely so that we can get to
huge amount of complex information easily and quickly. However we can hardly catch up
with the changes inside and most of the information disappear immediately whatever valuable
they are. Very often we like to classify information into classes which come from classes given
in advance. A class can be obtained through human recognition by which we can imagine
what’s going on by using classes. Since every class corresponds to certain concept, we may
see what a word does mean once we know the word belongs to the class.
In this work, we discussmulti-label classification problem and how to find potential classes.
Multi-class classification means a process to put information into one of multiple categories.
Any information in one category share common aspects which characterize the category given
in advance, called a class and its name a label. Automatic classification allows us to extract the
rules by inductive learning. We examine a collection of histories (attribute values with labels,
called training data) and then extract features specific to classes (Han et Kamber, 2011).
Research ofmulti-label classification has been initially motivated by the difficulty of concept
ambiguity encountered in text categorization. In fact, every document may belong to several
themes (labels) simultaneously and few document contains single label. One of the typical
approaches is probabilistic classification (Kita, 1995), since the traditional classification re-
sults depend heavily on training data. More important is that there is few corpora, although
we see huge amount of information with no label (raw data). Here in this work, we take a
semi-supervised approach within a framework of probability.
Here we focus our attention on a fact that how classes are constituted. Any news article
about international dispute of "Trading Vessels" in China may come from several labels of
politics, economy as well as history and culture. Every category carries its own meaning, al-
though it contains weighted combination of labels’ concepts as a one of the features (Han et
Kamber, 2011). This means we can define new classes for new categories by giving weight
- 77 -
