© Revue MODULAD 2010 - 59 - Numéro 41 
Determinants of the Net Interest Margin in the Banking Institutions: Contribution 
of PLS Regression Compared to the Principal Components Regression 
 
Benammou Salwa1 and Mlayeh Chahrazed2 
 
1Department of Quantitative Methods, University of Law, Economic and Political Sciences, Erriadh 
City 4023 Sousse, Tunisia. E-mail: salwa.benammou@voila.fr 
2Department of Quantitative Methods, Higher Institute of Management, Abed Aziz El Bahi Street, BP 
763 4000 Sousse, Tunisia. E-mail: Chahrazed.Mlayeh@isffs.rnu.tn 
 
Corresponding author: Mahjoubi Dalenda. E-mail address: dalendaisg@yahoo.fr. Address: 14, Rue 
Abdallah Ibn Raouha. Cité Erriadh. 4023. Sousse. Tunisie. Tel: +21673301165  
 
Abstract: Partial Least Squares regression and Principal Components Regression make possible to 
relate a set of dependant variables Y to a set of independent variables X, when there is 
multicollinearity. This paper suggests a new approach for analyzing the net interest margin. After using 
the PCR method, the determinants of the net interest margin have been viewed through a PLS model. 
 
Keywords: Partial Least Squares Regression, Principal Components Regression, net interest margin. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
The exhaustive development requires a deep survey on the set of events that can generate unfavorable 
variations and that have a negative effect on the national economy. The banking institutions represent 
an important market that has an efficient role in the development and the creation of a new economic 
politics. We identify the various risks to which the banking system is exposed. If they are badly 
managed, these risks can affect the bank’s objective and can lead to unfavorable situations. We carry 
out a statistical and econometric study to identify which principal risks that have an effect on the 
banking profit and reflect the reality economic of this market. 
This research points out the determinants of the net interest margin in the Tunisian banking structure. 
The article is divided into two sections. In the first part we introduce some tools Partial Least Squares 
regression (PLS) and the Principal Components Regression (PCR) and we justify the choice of the PLS 
