©Revue MODULAD 2010 85 Numéro 42 
 
Modélisation de séries temporelles multiples et multidimensionnelles 
 
Mireille Gettler-Summa *, Bernard Goldfarb*, Laurent Schwartz**, Jean Marc Steyaert**,  
Frédérique Lefaudeux*** 
 
*CEREMADE Université Paris Dauphine  
1 Pl Du Mal De Lattre de Tassigny - 75016 - Paris France 
summa@ceremade.dauphine.fr, goldfarb@dauphine.fr 
**LIX Ecole Polytechnique Paris 91128 - Palaiseau - France 
steyaert@lix.polytechnique.fr, laurent.schwartz@polytechnique.fr 
***Isthma,14 rue du Soleillet - 75020 Paris - France 
lefaudeux@isthma.fr 
 
 
Résumé : On présente ici une recherche de modélisation de séries temporelles multiples et multidi-
mensionnelles extraites de données de sites officiels. La difficulté réside d’une part dans la construc-
tion des bases de données en raison des différents formats initiaux, des incohérences et des données 
manquantes, d’autre part dans le grand nombre de variables, endogènes et exogènes, et dans la mul-
tiplicité des entrées admissibles pour le problème. Les séries temporelles exogènes sont de plus mu-
nies d’une partition a priori. On présente dans cette recherche une approche pour la réduction des 
variables  et des solutions de modélisation de ces données complexes que l’on construit à partir 
d’adaptation de solutions classiques au contexte temporel multidimensionnel.  
 
Mots clés : séries temporelles multiples, codage, réduction de dimension, modélisation, épidémiolo-
gie du cancer, variables latentes et séries temporelles 
 
 
Abstract: The most relevant elements in this paper are the automatic extraction of temporal data 
from Official databases and the modelization attempt of some multiple time series by exogenous 
other multiple time series. The results are applied on to an Epidemiological problem of modeling 
cancer rates incidence over twenty years, for different countries all over the world. Many issues 
come up   when getting the data: most of the data bases are not available in the same format, some 
data bases are limited in terms of the number of lines that are allowed for a single query, and after 
importing the data, one needs to have coherence and continuity over time for each variable. The 
variables may cover various domains and their definition may have changed over time: expert 
knowledge is needed to achieve the final attribute coding and validate the retained data. A pre proc-
essing phase is then carried on: splines functions for smoothing atypical values and for filling the 
remaining missing data by interpolation, temporal transformation such as 5th order sum over past 
years lagged variables in the cancer data base. As an example the epidemiological data consists at 
that point in a complex set of data: multiple (25 countries in the example), multidimensional (socio 
economy, nutrition, health care, environment, standardized cancer rates etc.) time series (twenty one 
years). In order to reduce the data dimension, an exploratory phase builds and discovers the factor 
blocks that will be introduced in the models. Factors are computed with the Varimax rotation 
method because most of the variables are highly correlated. Grouping is also performed through 
clustering approaches for complex time series and the partition is one of the exogenous variable for 
the modelization phase. A generalized LISREL approach for multidimensional time series is finally 
performed: as an example, ecology, socio economy, nutrition, health care, style of life and envi-
ronment are the latent variables of the epidemiological study whereas death cancer rates are the 
endogenous variables. 
 
Keywords: multiple temporal series, coding, dimension reduction, modeling, epidemiology of can-
cer, latent variables and series 
