Experimental Evaluation of a Dynamic Cubing System:
Workflow, Metrics, and Prototype
Anne Tchounikine∗, Maryvonne Miquel∗,
Usman Ahmed∗
∗LIRIS-CNRS UMR 5205, INSA-Université de Lyon, France
firtsname.lastname@liris.cnrs.fr
Abstract. This article originates in the efforts we made in the prototyping stage
of a project conducted in the field of new agile BI applications. In this earlier
work, we defined a model and algorithms for handling dynamic cubes that are
updated as single fact comes in. The proposal includes the definition of a tree
structure, called DyTree, used to store these cubes. A comprehensive experi-
mental evaluation was conducted to observe the behavior of the proposal under
some varying circumstances or settings, to help in understanding its working
and to provide feedback to improve the solution. In this paper, we describe the
workflow which has been used for this experimental evaluation. Performance
metrics and behavioral metrics are defined as output of the experimental eval-
uation workflow. Different types of data sets and parameters for algorithms are
the input used to configure the experiments. Using this environment and the pro-
totype, some examples of experimental studies are presented. This shows how
different scenarios can be simply constructed and how the experimental results
can be used to understand the behavior of our proposal and to evaluate perfor-
mance.
1 Motivation and Positioning
This article addresses the issue of experimental evaluations related to a research work in
OLAP. It originates in the efforts we made in the prototyping stage of a project conducted in the
field of new agile BI applications operating in fast evolving environnement. In this work, a so-
lution is discussed in order to provide better data freshness and reduce analysis latency (Ahmed
et al. (2010)). This solution allows on-the-fly insertions of facts and members by means of fre-
quent atomic insertions, thus leading to fast aggregate updates. We provided the definition of
a Dynamic Cube based on a multidimensional un-ordered and multi-level data space, enabling
its evolution. A tree structure incrementally stores detailed data and aggregates for the densest
regions of the data space thanks to a split strategy that promotes refinement of aggregates at
increasing lower level. This proposal was implemented in a prototype. This prototype consists
of a suite of tools starting from facts loading to OLAP navigation in the dynamic cube. This
prototype aims at functional testing and helps us to demonstrate the feasibility of the solution.
However, it is also a means for evaluating the performance of the proposal and studying its
- 177 -
