To initiate a corporate memory with a knowledge
compendium: ten years of learning from experience with the
Ardans method
Vincent Besson∗, Alain Berger∗
∗ Ardans SAS « Le Campus » - Bâtiment B1
6 rue Jean-Pierre TIMBAUD
78180 Montigny-le-Bretonneux
{vbesson, aberger}@ardans.fr,
http://www.ardans.fr
Abstract. Ardans method ArdansSas (2006b) and technology ArdansSas (2006a)
of knowledge capitalization and structuration are used with different industries
(automotive, aerospace, energy, defence, steel, health, etc.) for more than a
decade in France and Europe.
The proposed solutions in knowledge management and especially in expertise
capitalisation have set a lot of feedback over time. With a view toward ongoing
improvement, what are the impacts of these feedbacks on the method nowadays?
Put into practice into the industry, the return of investment of a capitalization
campaign is inferred from the quality of the knowledge base delivered at the
end of the campaign. Therefore, the method and the technology are intrinsically
connected. How IT tools can assist with the quality diagnosis of the knowledge
base?
A comparative study was conducted on the basis of the method Mariot et al.
(2007) exposed at EGC’2007. This article sets out the results of the changes
and improvements of the method, in conjunction with the latest technical and
scientific development on the one hand, and the change of the industry needs on
the other hand.
1 Introduction
Knowledge management inside industry has sometimes constraints that does not depend
on how much data you have to process or how “clean” is the raw data. The method described
in ArdansSas (2006b), MAKE, focuses on problems that have three main constraints. The first
one is obviously the financial pressure where the knowledge management projects take place.
The second one is the time pressure: knowledge management project are designed to be closed
in some days or weeks. In these time windows, the problems must be identified, a solution must
be designed, built and deployed. From then the work is finished for the knowledge consultant,
and the firm must lead the second phase (to give access to the knowledge to the learners) on its
- 401 -
