Detecting Anomalies in Data Streams using Statecharts 
 
Vasile-Marian Scuturici1, Dan-Mircea Suciu2, Romain Vuillemot1, Aris Ouksel3, 
Lionel Brunie1 
 
1 INSA Lyon 
2 Babes-Bolyai University, Cluj-Napoca 
3 Northwestern University, Illinois 
 
Abstract. The environment around us is progressively equipped with 
various sensors, producing data continuously. The applications using 
these data face many challenges, such as data stream integration over an 
attribute (such as time) and knowledge extraction from raw data. In this 
paper we propose one approach to face those two challenges. First, data 
streams integration is performed using statecharts which represents a 
resume of data produced by the corresponding data producer. Second, 
we detect anomalous events over temporal relations among statecharts. 
We describe our approach in a demonstration scenario, that is using a 
visual tool called Patternator. 
1 Introduction 
The physical space surrounding us is progressively equipped with different 
sensors, giving us a digital view/projection of the real world. These sensors produce 
raw data streams, such as temperature values, images, and badge readings. Still, it 
remains difficult for humans to perceive interesting information from those raw data 
which are increasing in frequency and precision. In this demonstration we propose a 
mechanism to describe the behavior of data streams based on statecharts. We use the 
temporal attribute associated with a stream in order to detect relations between 
statecharts corresponding to non-homogenous datasources. The events non-holding 
these relations are considered as anomalies. 
2 Statecharts modeling datasources 
In our vision, a datasource is an abstraction for a fountain/fabric of data entities 
in the environment. Examples of datasources are the values read by a temperature 
sensor or the events produced by a badge reader. We associate the entities produces 
by a datasource with the datasource itself. These entities share the same structure, 
associated with the datasource.  
The time plays a role in the description of a datasource DS. At every (discrete) 
moment t, DS is in a state defined by the produced entity at the instant t. The entities 
produced by a datasource, associated with a timestamp, form a data stream. 
A datasource DS at a time t is a sequence of timestamped data entities sharing the 
same structure (header). Each data entity has values from the cartesian product 
nAAAR  ...21 , where R  denotes the set of all positive real numbers (the time 
RNTI-E-19- 635 -
