Identifying the Presence of Communities in Complex
Networks Through Topological Decomposition and
Component Densities
Faraz Zaidi∗, Guy Melançon∗
∗CNRS UMR 5800 LaBRI & INRIA Bordeaux - Sud Ouest
351, cours de la Libération
33405 Talence cedex, FRANCE
{faraz.zaidi , guy.melancon}@labri.fr
Abstract. The exponential growth of data in various fields such as Social Net-
works and Internet has stimulated lots of activity in the field of network analysis
and data mining. Identifying Communities remains a fundamental technique to
explore and organize these networks. Few metrics are widely used to discover
the presence of communities in a network. We argue that these metrics do not
truly reflect the presence of communities by presenting counter examples. This
is because these metrics concentrate on local cohesiveness among nodes where
the goal is to judge whether two nodes belong to the same community or vise
versa. Thus loosing the overall perspective of the presence of communities in the
entire network. In this paper, we propose a new metric to identify the presence
of communities in real world networks. This metric is based on the topological
decomposition of networks taking into account two important ingredients of real
world networks, the degree distribution and the density of nodes. We show the
effectiveness of the proposed metric by testing it on various real world data sets.
1 Introduction
Most real world systems take the form of networks where a set of nodes and edges might
be used to represent these networks. Examples include social networks, metabolic networks,
world wide web, food web, transport networks. Community detection remains an important
technique to organize and understand these complex networks (Girvan and Newman (2002)).
Roughly speaking, we like to define a community as a decomposition of a set of entities into
‘Natural Groups’. Detection of communities has a wide range of applications in various fields.
For example, in social networks, community detection could lead us towards a better under-
standing of how people collaborate with each other or in a transport network, a community
might represent cities or countries well connected through transportation means.
Broadly speaking, research in the field of network analysis can be divided into two cate-
gories. First, by developing some metrics that can help us to analyze and detect community
structures and second, developing algorithmic procedures to find and group the communities
present in the networks. In this paper, we focus on different metrics proposed for community
RNTI-E-19- 163 -
