Ultrametricity of Dissimilarity Spaces and Its Significance
for Data Mining
Dan Simovici∗, Rosanne Vetro∗∗, Kaixun Hua∗∗∗
University of Massachusetts Boston
∗ dsim@cs.umb.edu
∗∗ rvetro@cs.umb.edu
∗∗∗ kingsley@cs.umb.edu
Abstract. We introduce a measure of ultrametricity for dissimilarity spaces and
examine transformations of dissimilarities that impact this measure. Then, we
study the influence of ultrametricity on the behavior of two classes of data min-
ing algorithms (kNN classification and PAM clustering) applied on dissimilarity
spaces. We show that there is an inverse variation between ultrametricity and
performance of classifiers. For clustering, increased ultrametricity generate clus-
terings with better separation. Lowering ultrametricity produce more compact
clusters.
1 Introduction
Ultrametrics occur in the study of agglomerative hierarchical clustering algorithms, phylo-
genetic trees, p-adic numbers, certain physical systems, etc.
Our goal is to evaluate the degree of ultrametricity of dissimilarity spaces and to study the
impact of the degree of ultrametricity on performance of classification and clustering algo-
rithms.
Measuring ultrametricity of metric spaces has preoccupied a number of researchers (for
example, in (Rammal et al., 1985)); however, the proposed measures are usable for the spe-
cial case of metrics and are linked to the subdominant ultrametric attached to a metric which
requires computing a single-link clustering or a minimal spanning tree. We propose an alter-
native measure referred to as the weak ultrametricity that can be applied to the more general
case of dissimilarity spaces.
A dissimilarity space is a pair (S, d), where S is a set and d : S × S −→ R is a function
such that d(x, y) > 0, d(x, x) = 0, and d(x, y) = d(y, x) for x, y ∈ S. We assume that all
dissimilarity spaces considered are finite.
A triangle in (S, d) is a triple (x, y, z) ∈ S3. To simplify the notation, we denote t =
(x, y, z) by xyz.
The mapping d is a quasi-metric if it is a dissimilarity and it satisfies the triangular inequal-
ity d(x, y) 6 d(x, z) + d(z, y) for x, y, z ∈ S. In addition, if d(x, y) = 0 implies x = y, then
d is a metric.
- 89 -
