Objective Novelty of Association Rules:
Measuring the Confidence Boost1
José L Balcázar∗
∗Departamento de Matemáticas, Estadística y Computación
Universidad de Cantabria
Santander, Spain
joseluis.balcazar@unican.es
Résumé. On sait bien que la confiance des régles d’association n’est pas vrai-
ment satisfaisant comme mésure d’interêt. Nous proposons, au lieu de la sub-
stituer par des autres mésures (soit, en l’employant de façon conjointe a des
autres mésures), évaluer la nouveauté de chaque régle par comparaison de sa
confiance par rapport á des régles plus fortes qu’on trouve au même ensemble
de données. C’est á dire, on considère un seuil “relative” de confiance au lieu du
seuil absolute habituel. Cette idée se précise avec la magnitude du “confidence
boost”, mésurant l’increment rélative de confiance prés des régles plus fortes.
Nous prouvons que nôtre proposte peut remplacer la “confidence width” et le
blockage de régles employés a des publications précedentes.
1 Introduction
The outcome of a Data Mining project is expected to offer some degree of novelty. Ho-
wever, to formally study the novelty of Data Mining results is far from being a trivial task.
Novelty refers to facts that are somehow unexpected, and therefore some expectation, lower
than actually found, must exist, due to some alternative facts or prediction mechanisms.
Here we consider the specific task of Association Rule Mining, and follow up a recent pro-
posal that, as a minimum, each rule should be evaluated for novelty according to the rest of the
rules mined, treated as “alternative” mechanism [4], [5]. These works propose the confidence
width as a measure of a relative form of objective novelty or surprisingness of each individual
rule with respect to other rules that hold in the same dataset, and propose also to block some
rules in case they do not bring in enough novelty with respect to a “blocker” itemset. Our
contribution here is a new novelty notion, the confidence boost, similar in its syntactic defini-
tion to confidence width, but very different in its semantics ; its main trait is that it encompasses
at once both the bound on the confidence width and the ability to detect that a rule would be
blocked, so that the confidence boost bound embodies both of the bounds proposed in [5].
The notions of confidence width and rule blocking from [5] are similar to the “pruning”
proposal from [14], in that the intuition is the same ; also our proposal here follows an ana-
logous intuitive path. Major differences are that, in the proposals we discuss, a large portion
of the pruning becomes unnecessary because we work on minimum-size bases (representative
rules, proposed in [1], in [13], and in [16]) and, more importantly, that the pruning in [14]
RNTI-E-19- 297 -
