Extending the Multidimensional Model for Linking Cubes
Alberto Sabaini∗, Esteban Zimányi∗∗, Carlo Combi∗
∗Department of Computer Science,
University of Verona, Italy
{alberto.sabaini, carlo.combi}@univr.it
∗∗Department of Computer and Decision Engineering (CoDE),
Université Libre de Bruxelles, Belgium
ezimanyi@ulb.ac.be
Abstract. Data warehouses structure data in multidimensional cubes, where di-
mensions specify different ways in which measures in facts may be viewed,
aggregated, and sorted. It is essential for data analysts to combine data from het-
erogeneous multidimensional cubes to enhance their analysis capabilities. For
this, users are restricted in using only shared dimensions for navigating related
multidimensional cubes. In this paper, we show that this limits the analysis pos-
sibilities and introduce an explicit link that relates two multidimensional cubes,
indicating that they represent different aspects of the same reality, and hence
they may be connected. We argue that the standard drill-across operator is not
suited to perform such operation, and we extend it by proposing a new operator
called drill-across-link.
1 Introduction
Data warehouses structure data according to a multidimensional space, where dimensions
specify different ways the data can be viewed, aggregated, and sorted. Events of interest for
an analyst are represented as facts which are associated with cells or points in this multidimen-
sional space and described in terms of a set of measures. Thus, every fact is based on a set
of dimensions that determine the granularity adopted for representing fact measures. Dimen-
sions are organized as hierarchies of levels that allow analysts to aggregate data at different
degrees of detail. One of the major challenges that must be faced by designers of multidimen-
sional models is to adequately represent the interactions between dimensions and facts (Song
et al., 2001). Another issue is to represent the connections between different facts in the same
schema. Indeed, data analysts often need to combine data from heterogeneous multidimen-
sional cubes. A key requirement in navigating multidimensional cubes from several sources,
according to Kimball and Ross (2013), is that they must have shared dimensions. Their widely
adopted view requires shared dimensions to be either from the same instance or identical in
terms of schema and data. The non-conformity problem arises when there is the need of com-
bining multidimensional cubes and using non-shared dimension. The inclusion of non-shared
dimensions in the navigation and visualization of multidimensional data from multiple sources
provides the analyst with the ability to view and analyze data that would be otherwise not
- 17 -
