RSS Merger
Fekade GETAHUN, Richard CHBEIR

LE2I Laboratory UMR—CNRS, University of de Bourgogne
Engineer’s wing, 9 Savary St., 21078 Dijon Cedex France
{fekade-getahun.taddesse, richard.chbeir} @u—bourgogne.fr

1 Introduction

RSS is the latest XML based speciﬁcation used mainly in the publishing industry to ren-
der news article, products, notice, etc. in standardized and transparent way. Merging or
combing news collected from set of providers is very important to different users (e.g. jour-
nalists, researchers, students, merchants, etc). E-news readers use RSS aggregator to add
new, change existing, remove existing feed address; download and read news without roam-
ing from site to site. However, to the best of our knowledge, there is no RSS aggregator that
identiﬁes the similarity between news items and merges them (putting them together) in an
intelligent way. Here, we propose our RSS merger that accepts the interest of a user (e.g. key
words, favorite news feeds, etc.) and produces a feed containing news items reorganized as
per the rules provided by the user. In this demo paper, we will demonstrate the architecture,
different components and the ways users can use the system.

2 System Architecture

The desktop version of our RSS merger application has 6 main and interacting components
as shown in Figure 1: Parser, Concept Extractor, Relatedness, Rule edi tor,
Merger and On t pu t Genera tor. The Pa rs er component starts by getting feed address
(link) stored in user proﬁle. In addition, the parser checks the validity, well formedness of
the feed and it extracts the news items embedded in charmel. The rela tedness compo-
nent measures the semantic relatedness between texts, simple elements and items. The relat-
edness between texts (i.e. content of simple elements) is computed using Vector Space
Model (Salton, 1983) after extracting key concepts embedded in each text using the con—
cept extractor component. The relatedness between simple elements and items is
identiﬁed by combining the relatedness between textual values (c.f. Getahun et a1, 2009).
The concept extractor component generates the concept set of a given text after re-
moving the stop words using predeﬁned dedicated dictionary. The component uses WordNet
(Richardson et a1, 1995) taxonomy as source of external knowledge base representing the
semantic information. In (Getahun et a1, 2009), we have provided action-oriented merging
approach. The merging of items is dependent on the relationship value existing between the
items. The rule editor component, shown in Figure 2, allows users to associate the
relationship existing between objects with action list. To do that, we provide the user with a
wizard having three steps. In Step 1, the user chooses/modiﬁes the output type which can be
RSS 2.0, XHTML or HTML. In Step 2, the user provides his/her perception of merging news
items by associating a relationship with an action. In addition, users are privileged to provide
custom rules by combining several actions. The ELSE rule, in Figure 2, is applied to merge

_ 637 _ RNTI-E-19

