Using Social Conversational Context For Detecting Users
Interactions on Microblogging Sites
Rami BELKAROUI∗, Rim FAIZ∗∗, Aymen ELKHLIFI∗∗∗
∗ LARODEC, ISG Tunis, University of Tunis, Tunisia
rami.belkaroui@gmail.com
∗∗ LARODEC, IHEC, University of Carthage, Tunisia
rim.faiz@ihec.rnu.tn
∗∗∗LALIC, Paris Sorbonne University, France
aymen.elkhlifi@paris4.sorbonne.fr
Abstract. In the current era, microblogging services like Twitter, gives peo-
ple the ability to communicate, interact, collaborate with each other, reply to
messages from others and create conversations. These services can be seen as
very large information repository containing millions of text messages usually
organized into complex networks involving users interacting with each other at
specific times. Several works have proposed tools for tweets search focused only
to retrieve relevant tweets. Therefore, users are unable to explore the results or
retrieve more relevant tweets based on the content, and may get lost or become
frustrated by the information overload.
In this paper, we propose a new method to retrieve conversation on microblog-
ging sites particularly Twitter. It’s based on content analysis and content enrich-
ment. The goal of our method is to present a more informative result compared
to conventional search engine. The proposed method has been implemented and
evaluated by comparing it to Google and Twitter Search engines and we obtained
very promising results.
1 Introduction
Last years, People are becoming more communicative through expansion of services and
multi-platform applications such as blogs, forums and social networks which establishes social
and collaborative backgrounds. This behavior leads to an accumulation of an enormous amount
of information. Among these platforms are so-called microblogs. Furthermore, microblogging
services (Boyd et al., 2010) gives people the ability to communicate, interact, collaborate with
each other, reply to messages from others and create conversations. While communicating
people share different kind of information like common knowledge, opinions, emotions, infor-
mation resources and their likes or dislikes. The analysis of those communications can be use-
ful for commercial applications such as trends monitoring, reputation management and news
broadcasting. In addition, one of main characteristic of microblogging services is that users
are not limited to produce contents; they can get involved indirectly in conversations with other
- 389 -
