OLAP query suggestion and discovery driven analysis
Patrick Marcel
Université François Rabelais de Tours, LI campus de Blois, France
Abstract. Interactive analysis of datacube, in which a user navigates a cube
with a sequence of queries to find and understand unexpected data, is often te-
dious. To better support this process, we propose in this paper to connect two
techniques proposed earlier in this domain. These techniques are, on the one
hand, discovery driven analysis, that guides the user towards regions of the cube
they will find of interest, and on the other hand, query recommendation, that
takes advantage of what the other users did during former analyses. Benefit-
ing from these techniques we propose a framework for recommending OLAP
queries to the user by taking into account what previous users found of interest
and the explanation they worked out.
1 Introduction
Context Interactive analysis of a data cube has often be described as a tedious process
whereby users interactively navigate a cube by launching a sequence of queries over a dataware-
house, what we call an analysis session (or session for short) in the following.
In a typical session, one of the queries detects something surprising and then the subsequent
queries are used to navigate the cube to explain what has been detected. But designing these
subsequent queries is often difficult since the user may have no idea of what part of the cube
he should navigate.
To cope with this, Sarawagi et al. proposed in Sarawagi et al. (1998) and subsequent work
new operators to guide the user towards unexpected data in the cube or to propose to explain
an unexpected result. We remark that these operators are applied only on query results and
they do not take into account what other users might have discovered.
On the other hand, in Giacometti et al. (2008) it is proposed to consider what other users
did during former sessions on the cube to suggest (or recommend) a query to the user. But in
this work no emphasis is put on what former users may have found interesting.
Problem In this present paper, we propose to bridge the gap between these two domains,
that is to answer the question: How to suggest to the user queries that lead him to interesting
parts of the cube, by taking advantage of what other users found interesting?
Contribution To answer this question, we propose a framework for recommending OLAP
queries that is based on the following principle:
