Warehousing The World:
Challenges From New Types of Data
Torben Bach Pedersen
Department of Computer Science, Aalborg University, Denmark
tbp@cs.aau.dk
http://www.cs.aau.dk/˜ tbp
Keynote Abstract
Data warehouses (DWs) have become widely used and successful in many enterprises, by
allowing the storage and analysis of large amounts of structured business data. DWs are based
on a multidimensional data model, where important business events, e.g., sales, are modeled
as facts, characterized by a number of hierarchical dimensions, e.g., time and products, with
associated numerical measures, e.g., sales price. The multidimensional model is unique in
providing a framework that is both intuitive and efficient, allowing data to be viewed and
analyzed at the desired level of detail with excellent performance. Traditional data warehouses
have worked very well for traditional, so-called structured data, but recently enterprises have
become aware that DWs are in fact only solving a small part of their real integration and
analysis needs.
Already today, many different types of data are found in most enterprises, including struc-
tured, relational data, multidimensional data in DWs, text data in documents, emails, and web
pages, and semi-structured/XML data such as electronic catalogs. Based on current develop-
ments within mobile, pervasive and ubiquitous computing, most enterprises will also have to
manage large quantities of geo-related data, as well as data from a large amount of sensors.
Finally, many analytical models of data have been developed through data mining.
The main problem with current technologies is that all these different types of data/models
cannot be integrated and analyzed in a coherent fashion. Instead, applications must develop
separate ad-hoc solutions for integration and analysis, typically for each pair of data types,
e.g., relational and text. This obviously is both expensive and error-prone. Additionally, pri-
vacy protection is often given low priority. This situation inspires the vision of developing a
breakthrough set of technologies that extend the benefits of DWs to a much wider range of
data, making it feasible to literally "warehouse the world". To do this, five unique challenges
must be addressed:
1. Warehousing data about the physical world
2. Integrating structured, semi-structured, and unstructured data in DWs
3. Integrating the past, the present, and the future
4. Warehousing imperfect data
