A Contextualization Service for a Personalized Access Model
Sofiane ABBAR∗, Mokrane BOUZEGHOUB∗,
Dimitre KOSTADINOV∗∗, Stéphane LOPES∗
∗Laboratoire PRiSM, Université de Versailles,
45 avenue des Etats-Unis, Versailles, 78035
firstname.lastname@prism.uvsq.fr,
∗∗Alcatel Lucent Bell Labs Villarceaux
Route de Villejust, 91620 Nozay, France
dimitre.kostadinov@alcatel-lucent.fr
Abstract. Personalization paradigm aims at providing users with the most rel-
evant content and services according to many factors such as interest center or
location at the querying time. All this knowledge and requirements are orga-
nized into user profiles and contexts. A user profile encompasses metadata de-
scribing the user whereas a context groups information about the environment
of interaction between the user and the system. An interesting problem is there-
fore to identify which part of the profile is significant in a given context. This
paper proposes a contextualization service which allows defining relationships
between user preferences and contexts. Further, we propose an approach for
the automatic discovery of these mappings by analyzing user behavior extracted
from log files.
1 Introduction
Personalization paradigm aims at adapting applications as much as possible to the user
preferences and to the user context. Adaptation may concern several aspects, such as system
reconfiguration, communication protocols, data sources selection, query reformulation, data
layout, or users feedback handling. Data personalization refers to the set of techniques which
allow providing users with the most relevant content. There exist two approaches for adapting
and customizing application interactions: User Centric Personalization and Context-Aware
Application.
Considering only one of the previous approches may not be satisfactory for many applica-
tions. Indeed, the same user, with different profiles, may prefer listening news during breakfast
and listening Rn’B music while driving a car. Alternatively, the same user, at his home con-
text, may have different domains of interest related to his hobbies or to his job. Thus, allowing
applications to combine both approaches leverages their adaptability to the benefit of the users.
The goal of this paper is to show, through the definition of a specific service called contex-
tualization, how a Personalized Access Model (PAM) can operate on both profile and context.
Given a profile model and a context model, Contextualization is defined as a cross-filtering
process, run periodically over the user’s interaction log file to extract possible associations
