Aggregative and Neighboring Approximations to Query
Semi-Structured Documents
Y. Mrabet∗ N. Pernelle∗ N. Bennacer∗∗ M. Thiam∗
∗4, Rue J. Monod, Parc Club Orsay université, 91483 Orsay Cedex
first.last@lri.fr,
∗∗Supelec, F-91192 Gif-sur-Yvette Cedex
nacera.bennacer@supelec.fr
Abstract. Structures heterogeneity in Web resources is a constant concern in
element retrieval (i.e. tag retrieval in semi-structured documents). In this paper
we present the SHIRI 1 querying approach which allows to reach more or less
structured document parts without an a priori knowledge on their structuring.
1 Approximate Queries According to Document Structuring
To retrieve the most suited tagged element according to a user query, classical approaches
tend to use a statistical indexing of the tagged zones. But, while such indexing has shown to be
very efficient for document retrieval, it remains unsatisfying for element retrieval. Cases where
the query is composed of many terms, which are not necessarily localized in the same parts of
the documents, are not well covered. Furthermore, even if the neighboring tags are taken into
account through an in-document distance, the ranking of the retrieved parts does not embed
any notion of structuring (e.g. a document node talking only about a conference A, may have
the same rank as a node talking about three different conferences).
We propose a semantic solution to cope with structures heterogeneity by making explicit
the structuring levels [Thiam et al. (2008)]. A document node is so said to be a part of speech
(i.e annotated by the PartOfSpeech metadata) if it contains many instances of different con-
cepts. Another node containing only one single instance of a given concept is annotated as
being an instance of that concept and respectively for the SetOf case, where a node contains
a set of instances of the same type. Furthermore the structural imbrication between document
nodes is used to infer semantic relations between the annotated instances. E.g. if the node
’< ul >’ is annotated as an instance of the ’Article’ concept and the next ’< li >’ node
is annotated as an instance of the Person concept, the relation < ul, authored_by, li > is
created. Referring to the above annotation model, we propose two approximation types. The
first, called aggregative approximation, uses the aggregate metadata defined in the ontology
extension (PartOfSpeech and SetOfConcepti) to look for less structured document parts if no
better structuring is found. The second approximation, called neighboring approximation, is
used to cover cases where we look for semantic relations that are not retrieved in the anno-
tation base (i.e. there is no imbrication between two document nodes which are annotated
1SHIRI : Digiteo labs project (LRI, SUPELEC)
