Binary Sequences and Association Graphs for Fast Detection
of Sequential Patterns
Selim Mimaroglu∗, Dan A. Simovici∗∗
∗ Bahcesehir University,Istanbul, Turkey, selim.mimaroglu@gmail.com
∗∗University of Massachusetts Boston, Massachusetts 02125, USA, dsim@cs.umb.edu
Abstract. We develop an efficient algorithm for detecting frequent patterns that
occur in sequence databases under certain constraints. By combining the use
of bit vector representations of sequence databases with association graphs we
achieve superior time and low memory usage based on a considerable reduction
of the number of candidate patterns.
1 Introduction
Mining sequential patterns was originally proposed in Agrawal and Srikant (1995), where
three algorithms, (AprioriAll, AprioriSome, and DynamicSome) were introduced. PrefixSpan,
based on the prefix projection idea, was introduced in Pei et al. (2001). SPADE Zaki (2001)
performs space efficient joins on prefix-based equivalence classes. PRISMGouda et al. (2007),
uses prime number encoding for support counting. A related but distinct problem (discussed
in Mannila et al. (1997)) is finding frequent episodes in very long sequences. SPAM Ayres
et al. (2002) finds sequential patterns using a bitmap representation. An extension of SPAM,
which incorporates gap and regular expression constraints was achieved in Ho et al. (2005).
The GSP algorithm Srikant and Agrawal (1996) is similar to AprioriAll; additionally it can
handle three types of constraints: minimum and maximum gap between consecutive elements
of a sequence (referred to as min_gap and max_gap), and window size between rows. When
min_gap = 0, max_gap =∞, and window_size = 0, the sequential patterns found by GSP are
the classical sequential patterns as introduced in Agrawal and Srikant (1995). The algorithm
cSPADE Zaki (2000) introduces similar constraints, and it is implemented on top of SPADE.
SPIRIT Garofalakis et al. (1999) is more general than both GSP and cSPADE as it deals with
regular expression constraints.
In this note we describe SPAG, an algorithm that combines the dual use of bit vector rep-
resentations of sequence databases with association graphs to achieve superior performance in
identifying patterns in sequences.
2 Apriori Frameworks on Sequence Sets
We refer the reader to Simovici and Djeraba (2008) for mathematical concepts and nota-
tions. Let I be a set of items, and let Seq(I) be the set of sequences of items of I . We consider
a a graded poset (P,≤, h), where P ⊆ Seq(I), and h : P −→ N, referred to as the set of pat-
terns, and a data setD defined as a sequence of sequences,D = {s1, . . . , sn} ⊆ Seq(Seq(I)).
A sequence Apriori framework is a triple ((P,≤, h),D, σ), where σ is a relation between pat-
terns and data, such that t ≤ t′ and (t′, s) ∈ σ implies (t, s) ∈ σ.
