Collaborative Outlier Mining for Intrusion Detection
Goverdhan Singh∗, Florent Masseglia∗, Celine Fiot ∗, Alice Marascu ∗, Pascal Poncelet∗∗
∗INRIA Sophia Antipolis, 2004 route des lucioles - BP 93, 06902 Sophia Antipolis
Prenom.Nom@sophia.inria.fr
∗∗LIRMM UMR CNRS 5506, 161 Rue Ada, 34392 Montpellier Cedex 5, France
poncelet@lirmm.fr
Résumé. Intrusion detection is an important topic dealing with security of in-
formation systems. Most successful Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) rely on
signature detection and need to update their signature as fast as new attacks are
emerging. On the other hand, anomaly detection may be utilized for this purpose,
but it suffers from a high number of false alarms. Actually, any behaviour which
is significantly different from the usual ones will be considered as dangerous
by an anomaly based IDS. Therefore, isolating true intrusions in a set of alarms
is a very challenging task for anomaly based intrusion detection. In this paper,
we consider to add a new feature to such isolated behaviours before they can be
considered as malicious. This feature is based on their possible repetition from
one information system to another. We propose a new outlier mining principle
and validate it through a set of experiments.
1 Introduction
Protecting a system against new attacks, while keeping an automatic and adaptive frame-
work is an important topic in this domain. One answer to that problem could rely on data
mining. Actually, Data Mining for intrusion detection aims to provide new tools in order to
detect cyber threats (Luo, 1999; Dokas et al., 2002; Bloedorn et al., 2001; Manganaris et al.,
2000; Wu et Zhang, 2003). Among those data mining approaches, anomaly detection tries to
deduce intrusions from atypical records (Lazarevic et al., 2003; Eskin et al., 2002). The overall
principle is generally to build clusters, or classes, of usage and find outliers (i.e. events that do
not belong to any class or group identifying normal usage). Actually, outlier detection aims to
find records that deviate significantly from a well-defined notion of normality. It has a wide
range of applications, such as fraud detection for credit card (Aleskerov et al., 1997), health
care, cyber security (Bloedorn et al., 2001) or safety of critical systems (Fujimaki et al., 2005).
However, the main drawback of detecting intrusions by means of anomaly (outliers) de-
tection is the high rate of false alarms since an alarm can be triggered because of a new kind
of usages that has never been seen before (and is thus considered as abnormal). Considering
the large amount of new usage patterns emerging in the Information Systems, even a weak
percent of false positive will give a very large amount of spurious alarms that would be overw-
helming for the analyst. Therefore, the goal of this paper is to propose an intrusion detection
algorithm that is based on the analysis of usage data coming from multiple partners in order
