Assessing the uncertainty in knn Data Fusion
Tomàs Aluja-Banet∗, Josep Daunis-i-Estadella∗∗, Enric Ripoll∗∗∗
∗Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Campus Nord, C5-204, E-08034 Barcelona
tomas.aluja@upc.edu
∗∗Universitat de Girona, Campus de Montilivi, Edifici P4, E-17071 Girona
josep.daunis@udg.edu
∗∗∗Institut d’Estadística de Catalunya, Via Laietana 58, E-08003 Barcelona
eripoll@idescat.net
Data fusion, also known as statistical matching, is a technological operation whose aim is
to integrate the information of two independent data sources. Let (X0;Y0) the donor file and
(X1) the recipient file, where the X are the common variables and the Y are the specific ones.
The goal is to complete the recipient file (X1, Yˆ1) in such a way that it can a be a realization
of the joint density function f(X,Y ).
There are three basic approaches for data fusion. The first one consists of embedding
the common and specific variables within a parametric multivariate distribution f(X,Y |θ),
assuming donors and receptors independently and randomly draw from this distribution. This
distribution can be factored into f(X,Y |θ) = f(Y |X, θY |X)f(X, θX); hence, it is possible to
estimate its parameters θX and θY |X from the available information and use them to impute
the missing block of data. The second approach consists of directly modelling the relationship
between the Y variables and the X variables in the donor file by means a regression function:
E(Y |X) = r(X) + ε and applying this model in the recipient file (explicit modelling). The
last approach consists of finding for each individual of the recipient file one or more donor
individuals as similar as possible, and then in some way, transferring the values of Y variables
to the recipient individual (implicit modelling). This method is known as hot deck, a term
borrowed from data editing in data bases.
Validity of the imputation
We will say that a data fusion is valid if the fused data set (X1, Yˆ1) is an instance of the
distribution function f(X,Y ). In general the distribution function f is unknown, thus we are
compelled to compare the empirical distribution functions ef(X1, Yˆ1) with the ef(X1, Y1).
We call the discrepancy between both distributions matching noise; following Paass (1985)
the matching noise depends on the rightness of the imputation function i(X) to approximate
instances of the joint true distribution, which in the parametric case it depends on how well
the assumed multivariate distribution represents the true data, and in the hot deck methodology
depends on, as before, the assumed imputation model i(X) and in addition to the existing
discrepancies between the recipients and their corresponding donors.
However, whatever the imputation method chosen, imputed data is not like observed data,
since it has inherent uncertainty, this is the uncertainty problem. Imputed values Yˆ1 are
estimates, thus, to be realistic, we need to take into account the variability of the imputed
data when analyzing it. This variability comes from the random fluctuation of the distribution
