Characteristics of the demand for private long-term care
insurance in France : a step by step estimation algorithm in
an analytical CRM context 1
Sébastien Nouet∗, Maximilien Nayaradou∗∗
Manuel Plisson∗∗∗
∗Pôle universitaire Léonard de Vinci, Centre d’Études et Recherche en Management de l’EMLV
Membre de l’Institut des Actuaires
sebastien.nouet@devinci.fr
∗∗Université Paris 9 Dauphine, Laboratoire d’Economie de Dauphine
maximilien.nayaradou@dauphine.fr
∗∗∗Université Paris 9 Dauphine, Laboratoire d’Economie de Dauphine
manuel.plisson@dauphine.fr
Abstract. Private long-term care insurance is underdeveloped in European coun-
tries. To understand this actual market failure, we study the long term care in-
surance demand characteristics using banking data and estimate the probability
of subscription. Thanks to a logit model and an original step by step estimation
algorithm, we show that belonging to upper classes reduces this probability; that
women belonging to farmer, worker or employee classes, and having some asset,
have 5 times more chances to subscribe (same result for the oldest individuals
of this category). Thus insurers are in a favourable position to develop their
long-term care portfolio: population ageing effect will make currently defined
targets more representatives during the next twenty years. This paper, the sole
empirical one using French data, provides insurers with a key decision-making
econometric tool for calculating the probability to subscribe, that can be applied
to their own portfolio.
1 Introduction
Recent studies show that the incidence of long-term care (LTC) increases strongly with age (cf.
Gisserot and Grass (2007)). In France, the probability that an individual who has reached the
age of 65 will use LTC services before his or her death is 40%(OECD (2005)). The ageing of
the population is therefore likely to increase the demand for LTC even though this increase will
be tempered by the increase in life expectancy without disability (Gisserot and Grass (2007),
Duée and Rebillard (2004)). For individuals cared for at home, this amounts to a cost which
fluctuates between e340 a month for light LTC and e5,300 a month in the event of maximum
physical and psychological dependence (Ennuyer (2006)). On average it amounts to e1,500 a
month (Loones et al. (2005)). Quite apart from the loss of well-being caused by the unexpected
onset of this state, LTC represents a highly significant financial risk burden by elderly people.
Should there be an increase in the number of people with LTC needs as well as an increase in
the average duration of LTC, this would raise a number of concerns, particularly concerning
the long-term balance of public finances. In France, the social benefits for LTC are called APA
(Personal Independence Allowance) and are paid by the French Departmental General Coun-
cils.
1The authors gratefully acknowledge, Risk Foundation supports: Chaire Dauphine-ENSAE-Groupama
« Les particuliers face au risque » and Chaire « Transition démographique-transition économique », ANR
Risk, CAPA Conseil, C. Hess, P. Cazes, H. Haddak of Paris-Dauphine.
- 17 -
