Asymptotic properties of functional maximum-likelihood
ARH parameter estimators
M.D. Ruiz-Medina and R. Salmerón
Department of Statistics and Operation Research, University of Granada
Department of Quantitative Methods for the Economy and Enterprise
mruiz@ugr.es
romansg@ugr.es
http://www.ugr.es/ mruiz/
Résumé. Dans cet article, nous nous intéressons au problème du calcul de la
variance asymptotique des estimateurs du maximum de vraisemblance des pa-
ramètres de projection de processus autorégressifs hilbertiens. Ces estimateurs
obtenus à partir d’observations fonctionnelles gaussiennes incomplètes ont été
étudiés dans Ruiz-Medina et Salmerón (2010). Notre approche consiste à es-
timer ces variances à l’aide d’une version fonctionnelle de l’algorithme SEM
(Supplemented Expectation Maximization) par Meng et Rubin (1991). La mise
en oeuvre de l’algorithme est basée sur l’extraction des fonctions propres et va-
leurs propres de l’opérateur d’autocorrélation et de son adjoint. Les effets de
l’ordre de troncature du spectre et de la discrétisation des fonctions sont illustrés
par des simulations.
1 Introduction
Functional Statistics (see, for example, Bosq, 2000 ; Bosq and Blanke, 2007 ; Ferraty and
Vieu, 2006 ; Ramsay and Silverman, 2005) provides a suitable framework to analyze large di-
mensional data sets. Complex biological and artificial systems can then be studied from this
perspective. In particular, in Biomedicine, Bioinformatics and image processing (see, for ins-
tance, Germain et al., 1999 ; Haoudi and Bensmail, 2006 ; Hyndman and Ullah, 2006 ; Leng
andMüller, 2006 ; Monk, 2003 ; Song et al., 2007, among others), the most extended projection
estimation methodology has been Functional Principal Component Analysis (FPCA), imple-
mented from the spectral decomposition of the empirical covariance operator, which is usually
computed by application of the method of moments. However, the ML (Maximum Likelihood)
estimation methodology has not been considered in these applications. In Ruiz-Medina and Sal-
merón (2010), ML projection estimators are computed from the application of the forward and
backward Kalman recursion, combined with EM algorithm (see, for example, Hartley, 1958 ;
Dempster, Laird and Rubin, 1977), in terms of the eigenfunction bases of the autocorrelation
operator and its adjoint. This projection methodology is most suitable than FPCA in the case
of ML estimation. The motivation of our paper lies on this fact, since, for the application of the
ML projection estimation methodology, information on its performance is obviously needed.
Specifically, the asymptotic variance of the ML projection estimators must be computed. The
