  
On the way to remote access to German official microdata: 
a glimpse of work in progress 
 
 
Rainer Lenz  
 
 Saarbruecken University of Applied Sciences 
Faculty of engineering 
Goebenstrasse 40 
66117 Saarbruecken 
Germany 
Rainer.Lenz@htw-saarland.de 
http://www.htw-saarland.de 
 
 
Abstract. A number of methodological and technical preconditions have to be 
met in order to provide (automated) remote data access. This paper outlines the 
German approach to achieving this goal with a strong focus on the scientific 
and methodological challenges, in particular, regarding the access to cross-
sectional and longitudinal economic statistics. The paper concentrates mainly 
on the generation of anonymised data with a structure similar to that of the real 
data, which are made available to data users. The data are provided in the form 
of what are called data structure files, which can be produced by using specific 
variants of microaggregation, multiplicative stochastic noise and multiple 
imputation. These data structure files are sent to the researcher after he has 
submitted a request for remote access. They allow checking a program code 
for syntactic and semantic errors before it can be finally applied to the original 
data by remote execution.  
 
1 Introduction 
The producers of data relating to surveys of economic statistics in Germany have 
observed a fundamental change in the demand for their products. In early 2000, providing 
the scientific community with so-called scientific use files (SUFs) – which researchers can 
use at their own workplaces outside the statistical offices - was considered a way, if not the 
“royal road”, towards giving empirical social and economic research adequate access to 
official microdata in Germany. Such SUFs have been available for what is called the off-site 
use of selected and strongly demanded statistics. As regards SUFs of economic statistics, 
however, these data stocks have not been very well received. Reasons to be mentioned in this 
respect are the new data perturbating anonymisation methods which are not yet familiar to 
researchers, too long waiting periods and the excessive effort required to compile the SUFs. 
Due to the necessary and partly drastic interference in the information structure of the data in 
