A Practical Approach to the Measurement of Similarity
between WSDL-based Web Services
Okba Tibermacine∗, Chouki Tibermacine∗∗
and Foudil Cherif∗
∗University of Biskra, 07000 Algeria
o.tibermacine@univ-biskra.dz,foud.cherif@yahoo.fr
∗∗LIRMM, CNRS and Montpellier II University, France
tibermacin@lirmm.fr
Abstract. Similarity measurement between web services is a key solution to
benefit from the reuse of the large number of web services freely available in
the internet. This paper presents a practical approach that enables an effective
measurement of web service similarity based on their interfaces descibed with
WSDL. The approach relies on the use of multiple matching techniques and dif-
ferent semantic and structural similarity metrics. The measurement of similarity
determines the best substitute for a failed web service. So, it serves as a good
indicator of the substitutability relation and thus of the capacity for reuse. A sup-
port tool, implementing the approach, is also presented with some experimental
results conducted on real-world web services.
1 Introduction: Context and Motivation
Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA) is an architectural style for designing distributed ap-
plications using functionality implemented by third-party providers. In an SOA, the service
requester satisfies its specific needs by using services offered by service providers. One con-
crete technology used for implementing SOA is Web Services.
According to the W3C, a Web Service is defined as "a software system designed to sup-
port interoperable machine-to-machine interaction over a network" (Chinnici et al., 2007). Its
interface can be described as a WSDL (Web service Description Language) document that
contains structured information about the Web service’s location, its offered operations and the
input/output parameters.
Interface descriptions (WSDL documents) enable Web services to be discovered, used by
applications or other Web services, and composed into new more complex Web services.
Studying the similarity between Web service descriptions is a key solution for building
compositions and healing them by finding relevant substitutes for the failed web services. The
real motivation of measuring the similarity of such specific kind of software artifacts emanates
from the fact that recently thousands of Web services are indexed in libraries, like ServiceX-
plorer 1 or XMethods 2. The existence of such large space of Web services led us to the study
1. ServiceXplorer Website: http://eil.cs.txstate.edu/ServiceXplorer/
2. XMethods Website: http://www.xmethods.net
- 3 -
