EDA 2008  
 
 
Deriving Ontologies from XML Schema 
Ivan Bedini*, Georges Gardarin** 
Benjamin Nguyen** 
 
*Orange Labs, Site of Caen - 14000, France 
ivan.bedini@orange-ftgroup.com; http://www.orange.com 
 
**Prism, Université de Versailles St-Quentin, 78035 Versailles Cedex 035 
<prenom>.<nom>@prism.uvsq.fr; http://www.prism.uvsq.fr 
 
Abstract. In this paper, we present a method and a tool for deriving a skeleton 
of an ontology from XML schema files. We first recall what an is ontology and 
its relationships with XML schemas. Next, we focus on ontology building 
methodology and associated tool requirements. Then, we introduce Janus, a 
tool for building an ontology from various XML schemas in a given domain. 
We summarize the main features of Janus and illustrate its functionalities 
through a simple example. Finally, we compare our approach to other existing 
ontology building tools. 
 
1 Introduction 
Ontologies appear as useful building blocks in several domains including the Semantic 
Web, data source integration, data visualization and zooming, text indexing and mining, etc. 
In Data Warehouse and On Line Analysis, ontologies are particularly useful for integrating 
multiple data sources and for zooming on data cube dimensions. They provide a deep under-
standing of data by composing and transforming it automatically. Though helpful and trendy, 
ontologies are still hard to build, to maintain and make evolve, notably when large (e.g., 
more than thousands of concepts). 
The “nuts and bolts” of ontologies are concepts and attributes with is-a and part of rela-
tionships. In that respect, ontologies are similar to object models of specific domains. XML 
schemas also have similarities with object models. While there exist many XML schemas in 
certain domains (eg., B2B e-commerce are at standardization level), there are only very few 
ontologies. In this paper, we propose a methodology and a tool for semi-automatic derivation 
of ontologies from XML schemas. We present the main features of our tool called Janus and 
illustrate it through a simple example. Janus is unique in the sense that it mixes several tech-
nologies (language analysis, text mining, schema validation, graphical representation) into an 
incremental methodology of ontology construction and evolution. We further propose a clas-
sification of ontology building tools and their comparison in terms of functionalities. 
The rest of this paper is organized in four main sections: i) ontology definition and re-
quirements for building tools; ii) overview of our Janus ontology skeleton building tool; iii) 
presentation of other tools; and iv) comparisons of tools. 
