A spatial rough set for extracting the periurban fringe 
 
Beniamino Murgante*, Giuseppe Las Casas*, Anna Sansone*,  
 
* University of Basilicata, Viale dell’Ateneo Lucano 10, 85100, Potenza 
beniamino.murgante@unibas.it  
 
 
Abstract. To date the availability of spatial data is increasing together with 
techniques and methods adopted in geographical analysis. Despite this ten-
dency, classifying in a sharp way every part of the city is more and more com-
plicated. This is due to the growth of city complexity. Rough Set theory may 
be a useful method to employ in combining great amounts of data in order to 
build complex knowledge about territory. It represents a different mathemati-
cal approach to uncertainty by capturing the indiscernibility. Two different 
phenomena can be indiscernible in some contexts and classified in the same 
way when combining available information about them. Several experiences 
exist in the use of Rough Set theory in data mining, knowledge analysis and 
approximate pattern classification, but the spatial component lacks in all these 
research streams.  
This paper aims to the use of Rough Set methods in geographical analyses. 
This approach has been applied in a case of study, comparing the results 
achieved by means of both Map Algebra technique and Spatial Rough set. The 
study case area, Potenza Province, is particularly suitable for the application of 
this theory, because it includes 100 municipalities with a different number of 
inhabitants and morphologic features. 
 
1 Introduction 
In a few years' time a transition has been occurred from the traditional town, character-
ized by static social contexts, to today's city more dynamic and very hard to control in small 
details. Until few decades ago the social structure of the city was characterized by a popula-
tion with strong social ties, whose life was oriented by institutions, rules, authorities.  
These inhabitants are now leaving the historic part of the cities more and more occupied 
by transition population (students, tourists, etc.). Often the centre of town is a big shopping 
centre with museums, libraries and other services but without residents. The new population 
neither has roots in those places nor the prospect of living there for the whole life. Older 
inhabitants have moved out of the urban area by creating a sort of dispersed spatial form 
(Indovina, 1990). This phenomenon occurs on the fringe of urban areas through progressive 
"coagulation" of buildings. Neighbourhoods without centre and with poor social relation-
ships have been realized. These form of urban sprawl has been encouraged by the increase of 
number of infrastructures, the growth of income and demand for goods and services. Urban 
sprawl can be considered a long-term trend for successful economic-territorial systems 
(Camagni, et al. 2002), characterized by soil consumption generating loss of competitiveness 
for agricultural activities (Murgante, et al. 2008). 
- 101 - RNTI-E-13
