 ©Revue MODULAD, 2004 - 100 - Numéro 31 
 
 
 
Visual Data Mining :  
the case of VITAMIN System and other software 
 
Alain MORINEAU – a.morineau@noos.fr 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Data mining is an extension of Exploratory Data Analysis in the sense that both approaches 
have the same goal: the discovery of unknown structure in the data. The chief distinction 
resides in the size and dimensionality of the data sets, data mining involving much more 
massive data sets. 
Never before data has been generated at such high volumes as it is today. Visual data mining 
is an approach to deal with this growing flood of data. The aim is to combine traditional data 
mining techniques with information visualization methods to utilize advantages of both 
approaches. The main advantage of visual data exploration is that the user is directly involved 
in the data mining process. The utilization of both automatic analysis methods and human 
perception promises more effective data exploration. Information visualization exploits the 
phenomenal abilities of human perception to identify structures by presenting data visually, 
allowing the user to explore the information space, to interact with the data and to draw 
conclusions.  
The VITAMIN System (Visual daTA MINing System) is designed to help the user in the 
analysis process of large survey data and time series data. The software has been developed 
by ATKOSoft SA with the contribution of UNINA-DMS and ONS, in the framework of the 
Information Societies Technology (IST) granted by the European Commission. 
This paper has been written in the context of the validation activities for the VITAMIN  
Software in the framework of the IST project. The first part is a quick description of the main 
functionalities in VITAMIN System, trying to stress the originality of this new approach. In 
the second part, we give a few examples of other software, the contents of which differ 
because either they address other kind of data, or they implement other kind of visualisation 
techniques.  
 
 ©Revue MODULAD, 2004 - 101 - Numéro 31 
 
PART 1 
VitaminS Project 
 
VITAMIN S approach 
VITAMIN S is a software for statistical visualisation, combining existing and new graphical 
methods. Usually when using classical statistical methods based on large computational 
efforts, it is not easy to extract significant knowledge from the data. Their output often range 
from very synthetic and sometimes cryptic results, up to thousands of numerical tables.  
The main goal of the system is to perform visual data mining on large data sets according to 
the needs of National Statistical Institutes. The system provides the user with: 
• classical and innovative visualisation tools;  
• an interactive framework to explore multivariate data;  
• linked displays, so that several visualisation methods can be used at the same time 
during the analysis process;  
• graphical representation linked with numerical analysis where it is possible;  
• combined with interactive result reports. 
In data mining, the most useful information is frequently difficult to identify by the mean of 
classical statistical methods. The innovative idea introduced in VITAMIN S consists in giving 
the users the capability to define the analysis parameters (variable, individual, options, etc.) 
by pointing directly on the graphical representation.  
Visualisation methods contribute to a more effective data analysis process: looking directly on 
the visualised data gives a better understanding of the data than looking on several (large) 
numerical tables. 
Starting from an initial graphical representation, users with no special skill in statistics are 
able to mine their data and look for interesting patterns. The system drives users towards the 
most appropriate analysis procedures with respect to the data and the software is expected to 
prevent developing improper analysis. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VITAMIN S visualisation examples 
 
 ©Revue MODULAD, 2004 - 102 - Numéro 31 
The visualisation methods selected for the VITAMIN S software are mainly related to the 
following statistical methods: 
• Principal Component Analysis (PCA) 
• Multiple Correspondence Analysis (MCA) 
• Non Hierarchical Cluster Analysis 
• Hierarchical Cluster Analysis 
The selection of the above methods derived from the needs of the end users and from the 
potentiality of these methods in analysing and visualizing huge amount of data. Some other 
methods seem to have been explored for successive developments of the VITAMIN S project. 
Concerning the time series datasets, the system mainly requires the use of the following 
statistical methods: ARMA Model and X12-ARIMA combined with Principal Components 
Analysis. 
Based on the above-mentioned methods the following visualisation methods were developed: 
• Factorial methods for cases and variable visualisation 
• Multiple factorial planes visualisation 
• Visualisation of a factorial plane along times/occasions 
• Clusters exploration and visualisation on factorial planes 
• Interactive dendrogram graphics for clusters exploration  
• Visual outliers identification in time series  
• Visualisation of the best aggregate time series 
• Visual aids for ARMA model identification 
Exploring ARMA models with multidimensional data analysis, VITAMIN Software 
demonstrates innovative ways to use visualisation methods for: 
• Adapting statistical concepts to the dynamic global environment 
• Processing and analysis of available statistical data using advance and state-of-the-art 
techniques 
• Improved accessibility and user-friendliness in statistics 
 
 
Main structure of the VITAMIN S software 
The main window of the VITAMIN S software is separated into two parts. The left part 
displays any active project in a tree structure (the “project window”) and the right is the area 
where result windows appear.  
The user selects an analysis method by selecting the Methods menu command (or by right 
clicking the data file name on the Project tree and selecting the appropriate method from a 
pop up menu). The name of the selected method is added to the Project tree, below the data 
file node. Then nodes are added for the Report and the several visualizations can be 
associated with the analysis method.  
When the user has selected an analysis method, the system prompts the user to define the data 
subset to be analysed. A wizard is displayed through which the user can define the criteria for 
extracting a subset from the original dataset and define the parameters specific to the method.  
 
 ©Revue MODULAD, 2004 - 103 - Numéro 31 
 
VITAMIN S main window 
 
 
The first report that can be generated using the input data is a Descriptive Report. 
Descriptive Report 
 
 
 ©Revue MODULAD, 2004 - 104 - Numéro 31 
The Descriptive Report includes many useful functionalities and calculations. The Summary 
statistics provides a set of several functions, and a section with the description of the 
statistical terms is provided at the end of the report: 
• Summary Statistics : Sum, Mean, Median, 1st and 3rd Quartile, Maximum, 
Minimum, Range, Standard Deviation, Variance, Interquartile Range, outliers, 
Extreme Values 
• Frequency Tables 
• Cross tables with raw frequencies and percentages 
• Correlation Matrix 
The user is able to view the HTML report either in his Web Browser or it is loaded in the 
VITAMIN-S right window for user’s convenience. 
 
Many Visualizations of Data Analysis 
A number of statistical methods are implemented as ActiveX controls. These controls can 
work with VITAMIN S as well as with any other ActiveX container application such as 
Excel, Internet Explorer, etc. The user selects one or more graphs that are associated with the 
current method by selecting the Visualization menu command and then gets the graphs that 
are associated with the method. This opens a new view containing the visualization graphs 
and some controls for user interaction.  
 
 
 
 
Visualization menu command (example) 
 
Box Plot 
Box plot is a descriptive graph that summarises the information contained in a variable. Some 
specific measures of location and variability are depicted, helping the user to obtain an image 
of the variable distribution. The box plot can give information about the distribution of the 
data, especially with respect to the asymmetry of this distribution. Pointing with the mouse on 
the outliers or the extreme values, a small window appears showing the respective value of 
the current point. 
 
 ©Revue MODULAD, 2004 - 105 - Numéro 31 
 
 
Box Plot Outliers 
 
 
Bar Chart, Pareto Chart, Histogram and Pie Chart 
The software provides the user with all usual statistical graphs such as bar chart, Pareto chart, 
histogram and pie chart, each one with many options and useful ways to customize the 
display. We can see below the control properties of a Bar Chart. 
 
 
 
 
Control properties of a Bar Chart 
 
 
Scatter Plot and Scatter Plot Matrix 
The determination of the relationship between two variables is achieved through a scatter 
plot. A scatter plot is useful in exploring the relationship between two variables. The user is 
able to view the graph by selecting Statistics\Descriptive Graphs\Scatter Plot menu 
command. In scatter plot method, the following dialog appears: 
 
 ©Revue MODULAD, 2004 - 106 - Numéro 31 
 
 
Scatter plot control properties 
 
There are many interactive functionalities:  
• select a region on the graph containing data points: All data points inside the region are 
colored with a different colour. 
• Paint the selected points in a region by clicking on a toolbar button. 
• Select some points and then zoom (unzoom) on them using a toolbar button. 
• Change the axis (make the X axis Y and vice versa). 
• View the data values that correspond to the selected points. 
 
 
 
Scatter Plot 
 
Scatter plot matrix consists of several scatter plots and histograms. The diagonal of the table 
depicts the histograms of the selected variables. Each scatter plot in the matrix is defined by 
two variables. Y-axis depicts the variable that appears at the same row of the matrix and X-
 ©Revue MODULAD, 2004 - 107 - Numéro 31 
axis depicts the variable that appears at the same column of the matrix. Scatter plot matrix 
provides the user with graphs of the relationship between variables.  
A pop-up menu opens the Control Properties menu command and the user can set several 
properties associated with the appearance of the scatter plot matrix window. 
 
 
 
Scatter Plot Matrix 
 
Parallel Coordinates 
The user has several ways available for manipulating the data set and its corresponding 
visualised objects (dimensions, observation, and data values on the graph), as well as a 
number of operations that can be applied in order to start identifying trends, patterns, and 
correlations between variables and sets of variables.  
An observation is a tuple of data values, represented on the parallel coordinates display as a 
broken line. The user can select it by clicking it with the left mouse button. A dimension is 
represented on the display as a vertical straight line, which spans from the top to the bottom of 
the visualisation window. The user can select it by clicking with the left mouse button. Data 
values are represented by the vertices of the broken lines of the visualisation. i.e., they are the 
points where the dimensions intersect with the observations.  
A region is an arbitrary user selection on the screen. It may contain any of the above object 
types. To select a particular region on the screen one has to drag the mouse while the left 
button is pressed. Sliders are a set of observations passing through certain data values range 
on a dimension. It may be moved across the dimension. It is a visual way to see how data 
values are changing across the data set variables. 
Many operations for the Parallel Coordinates visualization method are available from a tool 
bar that is available in the parallel coordinates visualisation window. Among them: Selection, 
Move, Hide/Unhide, Show info, Show only, Rearrange, Zoom, Same scale, Restore scale, 
 ©Revue MODULAD, 2004 - 108 - Numéro 31 
Paint, Cut, Summarize, Group, Undo, etc.  
 
 
 
Parallel Coordinates 
 
Variables and cases on factorial planes 
The factorial plane for any factorial analysis allows the visualization of the variables (columns 
of the dataset) and the cases (rows) using two-dimensional graphs determined by the factors 
that best represent the inertia of the cloud of points. This kind of graphical representation can 
be built using the results of the Principal Correspondence Analysis (PCA) and Multiple 
Correspondence Analysis (MCA).  
 
 
 
Information for a specific variable point in PCA 
 ©Revue MODULAD, 2004 - 109 - Numéro 31 
By pointing the mouse cursor on any of the drawn points, an info note appears providing 
information relevant to that point. Generally the same principles regarding the functionalities 
apply to any graph by using the menu bar located at the top. 
 
The representation of the cases allows the visualization of the observed units on a plane using 
the factors that best represent the variability of the observations. This representation also 
allows the visualization of the modalities of categorical variables. 
 
 
 
Cases with different colors according to modalities of a categorical variable 
 
It is also possible to visualize properties of points on the factorial plans such as contribution 
or squared cosines as shown on the figure: 
 
 
 
Units visualization according to Contribution 
 ©Revue MODULAD, 2004 - 110 - Numéro 31 
 
The user can choose a matrix-form representation using a factor on an axis and two or more 
factors on the other axes to simultaneously visualize the several factorial planes. On the basis 
of the number of selected factors, the system plots the coordinates of the items into multiple 
planes view. 
When the user selects points on one factorial plane then the corresponding selected points are 
simultaneously highlighted on the others factorials planes. Furthermore, when pointing with 
the mouse on a point of the graph, an info note appears with information related to the 
selected point. 
 
 
 
Multiple Planes with selection 
 
The user is provided with a report on the results of analysis where he can decide the contents 
of his report:  
 
 
 
 ©Revue MODULAD, 2004 - 111 - Numéro 31 
 
 
 
Factorial and Cluster Analysis – Tree View  
The results of Cluster Analysis are used for graphical representation. These results are shown 
in a typical dendrogram representation or in a tree-view representation. The user is able to 
view the dendrogram representation by double clicking on the node “Tree View” of the 
project tree. 
 
 
  
 
Tree View graph selection 
 
 ©Revue MODULAD, 2004 - 112 - Numéro 31 
 
 
Cutting the dendrogram for a partition  
 
The user can interact with the representations using some tools/controls on the graph window. 
Such interactions are for example: 
• In the tree-view representations, the interactions are directly embedded: the user can 
collapse (expand) a particular cluster to hide (show) the items included in that cluster. 
• In the dendrogram, a menu is displayed by right clicking on the red rectangles. When 
the user selects the menu command Parallel Coordinates he can view a parallel 
coordinates representation for the units that belong to the selected cluster. 
The user is able to get a report on the analysis by clicking on the node “Report” of the project 
tree, related to the current method. In case of factorial method executed before any cluster 
analysis, then the report also includes the information about the preliminary analysis. The 
report contains information about the cluster analysis, e.g. the results of K-means method, the 
description of the dendrogram (Hierarchical clustering), the test values as well as the graphs 
of the current method. 
 
 
Time Series analysis 
 
This part of the software is an innovative part compared to traditional Data mining software as 
we will see in the following. We will give only an quick overview of the methods 
implemented in VITAMIN System for time series analysis. 
 
Preliminary analysis: Transformed Series 
In the case of Time Series dataset, preliminary analysis is applied in order to identify the 
proper transformations that are to be used on time series in order to identify its components. 
These transformations are mainly based on differentiation on one hand, and seasonal 
adjustment on the other hand. In case of seasonal adjustment, we can choose among additive 
 ©Revue MODULAD, 2004 - 113 - Numéro 31 
and multiplicative models. Bar charts visualize ratio between the variance of the original time 
series and of the transformed time series.  
 
Time Series Exploratory Analysis: Best Aggregate and other methods 
Result of Principal Component Analysis is used to find a compromise aggregate series based 
on multiple time series. The coherence and reliability of the aggregate series with the 
component series is evaluated through Cronbach's α indices. One can plot all the aggregate 
time series leaving out one component at a time. Visualization is made using the first 
eigenvector computed in the Principal Components Analysis as weights, or using alternatively 
weights defined by the user.  
 
 
 
Visualization of the importance of each component time series 
 
Many other operations are possible on time series datasets in VITAMIN System, such that for 
example outliers identification or clustering techniques, ARMA models with 
multidimensional data analysis or dynamic PCA.  
 
 
 
PART 2 
Other Visual Data Mining Systems 
 
To explore and analyse large amounts of data in order to extract meaning is the field of Data 
Mining utilizing statistical methods (clustering algorithms, multidimensional techniques...) 
and Artificial Intelligence methods (Bayesian networks, Kohonen technique, neural 
 ©Revue MODULAD, 2004 - 114 - Numéro 31 
networks...). Nevertheless, current data mining tools are far from being simple. In general the 
complex parameters of these techniques make it difficult to control the mining process. It 
appears that data mining tools often are difficult to use and the results are difficult to value.  
Visualization techniques are continuously improved in order to provide a clearer view on 
different aspects of the data as well as a clearer view on the results of automated mining 
algorithms.  
 
Example 1: Visualization of structures 
A number of customized methods for visualizing structures have been developed, part of them 
based on the visualization of hierarchical trees. Some techniques show relationships between 
elements by special arrangements such as for example Treemap (Shneiderman, 1992) or 
Sunburst (Stasko & Zhang, 2000). Other techniques represents relationships by edges. It is the 
case of the Hyperbolic Viewer (Lamping, 1995) which uses the hyperbolic plane for arranging 
the nodes of the hierarchy by radial layout and projection into the Euclidian space. Another 
example is the Magic Eye View (Kreuzeler, Lopez & Schumann, 2000) where the layout is 
based on a plane radial layout which is mapped onto a hemisphere, with possibility of 
focusing to display the context with a smooth transition. 
 
Fig. Sunburst image 
 
Example 2 : visualisation of contents 
Techniques to visualize the quantitative and qualitative properties of data have to deal with 
large amounts of multivariate data. We may use Parallel Coordinates to map the n-
dimensional space onto a two-dimensional plane as proposed in VITAMIN S. Scatterplot 
Matrices arrange bivariate displays in adjacent attributes in matrix form in one image. With 
icon-based techniques, the attribute values of the elements are mapped to the features of an 
icon. It is the case of Chernoff Faces or Needle Icons.  
For effective visual data mining, the data analyst must be able to interact and to change the 
visualizations (ie. the mining parameters) according to his needs. Interaction techniques may 
be navigation techniques using manual or automated methods to modify the projection of the 
data on the screen. They may allow the user to adjust the level of detail on parts of the 
visualization to emphasize some subset of the data. Some techniques provide users with the 
ability to select and isolate a subset of the displayed data for operations such as highlighting 
or filtering.  
Visual data exploration aims at integrating the human in the data exploration process. Since 
the user is involved in the exploration process, shifting or adjusting the exploration goals is 
 ©Revue MODULAD, 2004 - 115 - Numéro 31 
automatically done if necessary. Visual data exploration should be intuitive and require no 
understanding of complex statistical algorithms with multiple parameters. The visualization of 
the data allows the user to come up with new hypotheses and the verification of these 
hypotheses can be done also via visual data mining or through statistical techniques.  
 
Example 3: Visualization of links: WordMapper 
Visual link analysis combines powerful data mining algorithms with visual representation of 
associations as networks. The results of the analysis are displayed as a graph of linked objects. 
It allows you to discover hidden structure in large amounts of data. The graphic visualization 
facilitates the understanding of relationships among items and allows the user to quickly 
identify interesting patterns for further investigation. 
The links between nodes can be analyzed as proximities between cities on a roadmap. This 
type of analysis is very intuitive and quicker than the search of information in a great number 
of cross tabulations. This approach does not require particular statistical skills.  
WordMapper analysis performed on databases allows the quick identification of the 
significant connections among items and their visual representation as graphs. The connection 
nets are easy to interpret and the user's interaction facilitates the navigation within huge 
amounts of data. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. WordMapper image 
 
For example, WordMapper creates networks in order to represent the connections among 
modalities of categorical variables. All the relations are taken into account : an item is 
associated to all the categories of all variables. The user can navigate in several maps by 
selecting nodes and opening new relations between items. The software detects homogeneous 
classes of items, or clusters. These clusters identify general themes. WordMapper has four 
levels of maps : the clusters' map, the sub-clusters' map, the one category-oriented map, the 
several categories-oriented map. By clicking on the different items, the user goes from one 
level to the other. He navigates within the network. He can also go back and browse the initial 
data. A scroll bar can be used to display the most important nodes on the map.  
 
 ©Revue MODULAD, 2004 - 116 - Numéro 31 
Example 4: Circle Segment 
Circle segments is a relatively new technique for visualizing large amounts of high-
dimensional data. The technique uses one colored pixel per data value and can therefore be 
classifed as a pixel-per-value technique (Ankerst et al., 1996). The basic idea of the 'circle 
segments' visualization technique is to display the data dimensions as segments of a circle. If 
the data consists of k dimensions, the circle is partitioned into k segments, each representing 
one data dimension. Inside the segments, the data values belonging to one dimension are 
arranged from the center of the circle to the outside in a back and forth manner orthogonal to 
the line that halves the segment. The frst results show that the 'circle segment' technique is 
very powerful for visualizing large amounts of data, providing more expressive visualizations 
than other wellknown techniques such as the 'recursive pattern' technique and traditional 'line 
graphs'. A further advantage of this technique is that it allows the user to control the 
arrangement of the dimensions, which is important especially for comparing multiple 
dimensions. 
 
 
 
Circle segment image 
 
Example 5: Some comments on Parallel Coordinates 
Parallel Coordinates is a multidimensional visualization tool often employed for data 
visualization. In order to represent a d-dimensional point, the basic idea is to draw d parallel 
axes labeling them according to the data variables. A point is then represented by locating the 
value of each variable along its respective axis and then joining the resulting points by a 
broken line segment. Many such diagrams are found in the literature. A discussion of the 
statistical and data analytic interpretations of parallel coordinate displays is given in Wegman 
(1990). 
One advantage of the parallel coordinate display is that it represents d-dimensional points in a 
2-dimensional planar diagram. In principle, there is no upper limit to the number of 
dimensions that can be represented. The big idea of the parallel coordinates representation, 
however, proceeds from its interpretation in terms of projective geometry. Both the Cartesian 
coordinate display and the parallel coordinate display can be regarded as projective planes. 
The mappings from the Cartesian coordinate system to the parallel coordinate system can be 
shown to preserve certain mathematical properties through the projective geometry notion of 
 ©Revue MODULAD, 2004 - 117 - Numéro 31 
duality of points and lines.  
One extremely useful property is that conic sections in Cartesian coordinates map into conic 
sections in parallel coordinates. In particular, ellipses in Cartesian coordinates map into 
hyperbolas in parallel coordinates. Thus, point clouds from high-dimensional ellipsoidal 
distributions can readily be recognized in parallel coordinates by structures with hyperbolic 
boundaries. Other dualities of interest include the fact that rotations in Cartesian coordinates 
get mapped into translations in parallel coordinates and vice versa. 
Another useful feature of parallel coordinate displays is the ability to distinguish clusters. Any 
gap in any slice of the diagram separates two clusters. This ability to separate clusters is an 
extremely important feature of parallel coordinates. 
Other interpretations include ability to detect linear structures and multidimensional modes. 
One feature also worth mentioning is the ability to compare observations on a common scale. 
Of all of the multidimensional data representations such as star plots, Chernoff faces, glyphs, 
and so on, parallel coordinates are unique in their ability to represent common scales on 
parallel axes. This is the easiest form of measurement comparison for humans to make.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. Parallel Coordinates image (Wegman) 
 
Example 6: The Grand Tour 
The Grand tour is an animation of the data. The basic idea of a Grand tour is to look at a data 
cloud from all possible points of view. It effectively allows for the data analyst to look at the 
data from all points of view. It allows the human visual system to follow the data cloud in the 
sense that, as the tour progresses, individual points make only small incremental changes at 
each step of the tour.  
The d-dimensional Grand Tour is a generalization of the usual grand tour introduced by 
Asimov (1985) and Buja and Asimov (1985). It is a continuous geometric transformation of a 
d-dimensional coordinate system such that all possible orientations of the coordinate axes are 
eventually achieved. This animation allows for much more structure to be revealed than 
would be from simply looking at static plots.  
The key idea is to find a path through the set of all rotation matrices as a function of a time 
parameter. Once a rotation matrix is determined, the canonical basis vectors for the coordinate 
system are rotated by the matrix and then the data cloud is projected into the rotated 
 ©Revue MODULAD, 2004 - 118 - Numéro 31 
coordinate system. Coupled with the parallel coordinate display, these two techniques allow 
for an in-depth study of high dimensional data. A grand tour is in some sense a generalization 
of a two-dimensional rotation, although it is not a rotation in conventional sense. Partial grand 
tours can be accomplished by holding one or more variables fixed. 
 
Example 7: Brushing 
Ordinary brushing is implemented by drawing a rectangular box and accomplished by 
brushing a data cloud with a color for the purpose of visually isolating segments of the data. 
Any data point or line segment, which intersects the rectangular box, is colored with the 
chosen color.  
In data sets where there is considerable overplotting, brushing is potentially misleading, 
especially where there is an animation such as rotation or Grand tour. Saturation Brushing 
(Wegman et al., 1997) is a generalization of ordinary brushing. In saturation brushing, each 
point is assigned a highly desaturated color (nearly black) and when points are overplotted, 
their color saturations are added via a computer hardware device for blending two images. 
Because it is a hardware rather than software implementation, it is usually very fast.  
Thus, heavily overplotted pixels have fully saturated colors, whereas pixels with little 
overplotting remain nearly black. Saturation brushing is an effective method for dealing with 
large data sets. Coupled with parallel coordinates and the Grand tour, these methods allow for 
an extremely effective visual approach to large, high-dimensional data. 
 
Example 8: ILOG-Discovery System 
ILOG Discovery is a visual information exploration tool. It provides simple dialogs to view 
this data in many different ways, highlight trends, spot general patterns, and pinpoint 
exceptions to find out what underlying structures govern data. It can handle large amounts of 
data and produce a wide variety of visualizations with few manipulations, which makes it an 
interesting exploration tool. One can filter the data sets and then create selections and 
viewpoints in these visualizations. One can create template visualizations for easy reuse.  
 
Histograms and Distributions 
Parallel histograms and parallel coordinates give a first overall glimpse of the data set when 
the data consists of numerous numerical or enumerated variables. These visualizations let you 
spot the general distribution of each variable, find out any outliers or missing data, and detect 
possible correlations between variables. 
• Parallel histograms present the data set in a table in which each variable is 
represented by a small bar whose length is proportional to the variable's value. 
• Parallel histograms with size specification. If one of the variables can be summed 
up (for example, if a variable represents a size, a population, or an absolute value 
referring to each object), then you can make the width proportional to this variable. 
This emphasizes the objects that have large values for this variable. 
• Parallel coordinates. Parallel coordinates provide you with information on the 
various distributions and correlations between columns of the data sets. 
 
 ©Revue MODULAD, 2004 - 119 - Numéro 31 
 
 
Parallel histograms with size specification for huge data sets 
 
 
 
DISCOVERY Parallel coordinates 
 
Graphs 
2-D plots and diagrams are useful to compare two major variables, visually assessing their 
correlation and distribution. Other graphic attributes can be mapped (such as size and colour) 
to include further variables into the correlation analysis. When you want to focus your 
attention on a few specific variables, you can use: 
• Simple 2-D graphs 
• Augmented graphs with size specification, colours, embedded bar charts, and other 
features. 
• Interactively filtered graphs. The software enables dynamic queries, which are 
particularly useful with 2-D graphs. 
 ©Revue MODULAD, 2004 - 120 - Numéro 31 
 
 
US cities population (by longitude and latitude) 
 
Maps and Hierarchies 
Maps of various kinds (grids, treemaps, and others) are useful when the data is hierarchized, 
or when you want to see how the data is distributed according to one or more dominant 
criteria: 
• Grids enable you to view data split into multiple categories, each category being 
shown as a small square whose representation can be customized to display relevant 
information on this category. 
• Hierarchized views. Grids and other maps can be embedded in one another, showing 
the relative distribution of a subcategory according to a main category. 
• Treemaps are one kind of hierarchized view that can be produced with the software. 
 
 
Hierarchized Views 
 
 
Treemaps 
 
 ©Revue MODULAD, 2004 - 121 - Numéro 31 
 
Data Visualization Techniques: Final remarks 
Pioneering works of Bertin (1981) and Tufte (1983) focused on visualization with inherent 2D 
or 3D semantics. Important development of visualization techniques for arbitrary 
multidimensional data appears in the 1970 in France with Benzécri (1973) using the 
techniques for dimension reduction: principal components analysis for quantitative data and 
multiple correspondence analysis for qualitative data. Multidimensional scaling has the same 
goals but uses the similarity-dissimilarity matrix which prevents the processing of large data 
sets. Segmentation and aggregation techniques coupled with principal coordinates graphical 
displays provide a lot of enlightening visualization displays.  
Visual Data Mining is the process of finding previously unknown information from a data 
base, using data base management, data analysis, data mining and data visualization facilities. 
Since visualization is a critical component, this places greater focus on the human component 
of the knowledge discovery process. Visual data mining is then inherently interactive: it 
focuses on refining hypotheses based on results obtained from interacting with the data.  
The data analysis part of the process provides discovery functions such as clustering, principal 
coordinates, regression, decision tree, pattern matching, etc. Automatic discovery algorithms 
determine significant pattern classifications from the data with minimal user intervention. A 
more human-centred approach is exemplified by OLAP systems where data is organized into 
hierarchies of different resolutions. In that context, a drill-down feature is used to access 
lower-level data from summary results. Other data navigation aids are used such as cross-
tabulations, comparing graphs in scatter plot matrices: a popular method is to link data 
displays together and brush one display to see the effects on the other displays.  
 
Scatterplot Matrices 
 
The visualisation part of the process must provide an adequate user interface to map data, and 
operations to intuitive forms for the user to interact with data. This visualization field has 
yielded many techniques for portraying data in 2D and 3D spaces often with animations. They 
transfer the discovery task upon the user who has to change the display parameters such as 
viewing orientations, thresholds, opacity or data ranges. 
The user part of the process is to perform sequences of linked interactions in order to isolate 
relevant information that serve to generate and validate hypotheses about the data. The user 
drives the discovery process by formulating and testing hypotheses and finally drawing 
conclusions.  
 ©Revue MODULAD, 2004 - 122 - Numéro 31 
The case of huge data  
On huge data sets, visualization often works in a batch mode where a cursor interface might 
not be appropriate for interaction. By nature the visualization process affords greater 
interactions with data because the graphical display may uncover relationships and 
information undetected by automatic tools. Then there are visual probes that need to be 
mapped to the data base for rapid data selection such as dynamic queries for retrieved data 
(Albher et al., 1992).  
 
 
 
References 
Albher, C., Williamson, C., Schneiderman, B.: Dynamic Queries for Information Exploration: 
an Implementation and an Evaluation. Proceeding of CHI’92, pp. 619-626, 1992. 
Ankerst, M., Keim, D., Kriegel, H.: Circle Segments': A Technique for Visually Exploring 
Large Multidimensional Data Sets, Proc. Visualization '96, Hot Topic Session, San 
Francisco, CA, 1996. 
ATKOSoft S.A. 15 Etolias str., 152 31, Athens, Greece. E-mail: info@atkosoft.com, URL: 
http://www.atkosoft.com 
Baudel, T.: ILOG Discovery Preview, http://www2.ilog.com 
Benzécri, J-P.: L’Analyse des Données. Dunod, Paris, 1973. 
Bertin, J.: Graphics and Graphic Information Processing. Berlin, 1981. 
Grimmer J-F.: WordMapper, GrimmerSoft, 2003, http://www.grimmersoft.com 
Kreuzeler, M.; Lopez, N.; Schumann, H.: A Scalable Framework for Information 
Visualization. Proceedings InfoVis’2000, Salt Lake City, 2000, pp. 27-36.  
Lamping, J. et al: A Focus Context Technique Based on Hyperbolic Geometry for Viewing 
Large Hierarchies. ACM Proceedings CHI’95, Denver, 1995, pp. 401-408.  
Lebart L., Morineau A., Piron M. (1995). Statistique Exploratoire Multidimensionnelle.  
Dunod, Paris. 
Shneiderman, B. Tree Visualisation with Treemap: a 2D Space Filling Approach. ACM 
Transactions on Graphics, Vol.11, No 1, 1992, pp. 92-99. 
Stasko, J.; Zhang, E.: Focus Context Display and Navigation Techniques for Enhancing 
Radial Space Filling Hierarchy Visualizations. Proc. IEEE Information Visualization 
2000, Salt Lake City, UT, Oct. 2000, pp. 57-65. 
Tufte, E. R.: The Visual Display of Quantitative Information. Graphics Press, Cheshire, CT, 
1983. 
Wegman, E.: Hyperdimentional data analysis using Parallel Coordinates. JASA, ‘(1990) 
vol.85, pp. 664-675. 
Wegman, E. and Luo, Q. (1997), High dimensional clustering using parallel coordinates and 
the grand tour. Computing Science and Statistics, vol.28, pp. 352-360. 
