Introduction : 
knowledge quality measures in a data-mining process 
Vipin Kumar*, ** 
* Director, Army High Performance Computing Research Center 
** Professor, Department of Computer Science & Eng, University of Minnesota 
kumar@cs.umn.edu
http://www.cs.umn.edu/~kumar
The author. Vipin Kumar is currently the Director of Army High Performance 
Computing Research Center and Professor of Computer Science and Engineering at the 
University of Minnesota.  His research interests include High Performance computing, 
data mining, and their applications to information assurance.  He has authored over 200 
research articles, and co-edited or co-authored 9 books including the widely used text 
book ``Introduction to Parallel Computing", and an upcoming edited collection, 
"Managing Cyber Threats: Issues, Approaches and Challenges" to be published by 
Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
Kumar has served as chair/co-chair for many conferences/workshops in the area of data 
mining and parallel computing, including the IEEE International Conference on Data 
Mining (2002) and the 15th International Parallel and Distributed Processing 
Symposium (2001).  Kumar serves as the chair of the steering committee of the SIAM 
International Conference on Data Mining, and serves on the editorial boards of 
Knowledge and Information Systems, IEEE Computational Intelligence Bulletin, 
Annual Review of Intelligent Informatics, Parallel Computing, the Journal of Parallel 
and Distributed Computing, and has served on the editorial boards of IEEE 
Transactions of Data and Knowledge Engineering (93-97), IEEE Concurrency (1997-
2000), and IEEE Parallel and Distributed Technology (1995-1997).  He is a Fellow of 
IEEE, a member of SIAM, and ACM, and a Fellow of the Minnesota Supercomputer 
Institute.
Advances in information technology and data collection methods have led to the 
availability of large data sets in commercial enterprises and in a wide variety of scientific and 
engineering disciplines. Examples of large data sets are genomic data, climate data, and 
market basket data collected at commercial outlets. There is an unprecedented opportunity to 
analyze such data and extract intelligent and useful information. The potential for return to 
the society from this analysis is huge. For example, the understanding of genome expression 
data can lead to the development of better and cheaper drugs that have fewer side effects. 
The information collected from the analysis of market-basket data can improve the 
profitability of a corporation. Indeed, researchers in the fast growing discipline of knowledge 
RNTI-E-1     1
Introduction
discovery and data mining are developing automated techniques for discovering novel and 
useful information and patterns from large amounts of data. 
The analysis of relationships among variables is a fundamental task at the heart of many 
data mining problems. For example, the central task of association analysis is to discover sets 
of binary variables (called items) that co-occur together frequently in a transaction database, 
while the goal of feature selection is to identify groups of variables that are highly correlated 
with each other, or with respect to a special target variable. Regardless of how the 
relationships are defined, such analyses often require a suitable measure to evaluate the 
dependencies between variables.  
Numerous measures have been developed in diverse fields such as statistics, social 
science, machine learning, and data mining. For example, objective measures such as 
support, confidence, interest factor, correlation, and entropy are often used to evaluate the 
interestingness of association patterns - the stronger is the dependence relationship, the more 
interesting is the pattern. Similarly, measures such information gain and gini index are used 
for measuring the quality of rules and predictive models. A measure helps in identifying a 
small set of potentially interesting association patterns, rules, or predictive models out of a 
very large number of possibilities that are typically available for most non-trivial data sets. 
However, measures do not always agree with each other. In fact, in many situations, 
different measures may provide conflicting information about the interestingness of a 
pattern. The applicability and suitability of a measure is often dependent upon the nature of 
the data and the application domain. The understanding of this dependence is key to selecting 
the right measure for the application at hand. 
This special issue focuses on the critical topic of knowledge quality measures in the data 
mining process.  Papers included in this issue present new methods for evaluating association 
patterns and fuzzy rules, new criteria to evaluate the goodness of measures, and systematic 
evaluations of several measures commonly used. It is hoped that this timely collection of 
papers on a very important topic will be found valuable by researchers and practitioners in 
data mining. 
2     RNTI-E-1
