Infrastructures pour les entrepôts de données
C. Madera
Products and Solutions Support Center (PSSC)
IBM Montpellier, France
cedrinemadera@fr.ibm.com
http://www.ibm.fr
Conférence industrielle invitée
Why it is so important to take care about the infrastructure choice in data warehousing
solution, particular now?
During the last 20 years evolutions and revolution in business intelligence (BI) area were
driven by the technologies discover, in particular with new software products: Queries, Olap,
data mining, analytical , ETL, metadata tools. The focus was given first to functional coverage,
the end users functionalities, the data architecture, the database capabilities but platform was
not in the decision center in the component of the BI solution.
Since two years users start to ask to access information in real time, what we can call Dy-
namic warehousing. Dynamic warehousing is a new approach to address the primary business
challenges organizations face today, which requires the ability to deliver the right information
to the right people at the right time to more effectively leverage information and enable more
effective business decisions. It’s about information on demand to optimize real-time processes.
This new requirements highlight the platform capabilities and now the challenge start first
with an infrastructure challenge in the BI solutions which are delivered to the customers.
Dynamic Warehousing requires four key things:
1. Support for real-time access to aggregated, cleansed information, which can be delivered
in the context of the activities and processes being performed;
2. Analytics that can be leveraged as part of a business process;
3. The ability to incorporate knowledge from unstructured information; and
4. A complete set of integrated capabilities that extend beyond the warehouse to enable
Information on Demand
Customers have a real need of Dynamic DataWarehousing which is much more than a Data
Warehouse, a new end user product or ETL tool. Today it is more an infrastructure challenge. In
this presentation the key role of the infrastructure in the data warehousing will be highlighted
specially in the dynamic data warehousing area.
– Why the platform choice is important?
– What are the keys points selection?
