  
A Conceptual Modeling Approach for Data Warehouses 
 
Juan Trujillo 
 
University of Alicante 
Spain 
 
Summary 
The multidimensional (MD) modeling, which is the foundation of data 
warehouses (DWs), MD databases, and On-Line Analytical Processing 
(OLAP) applications, is based on several properties different from those in 
traditional database modeling. In the past few years, there have been some 
proposals, providing their own formal and graphical notations, for representing 
the main MD properties at the conceptual level. However, unfortunately none 
of them has been accepted as a standard for conceptual MD modeling. 
 
In this talk, we present an extension of the Unified Modeling Language (UML) 
using a UML profile. This profile is defined by a set of stereotypes, constraints 
and tagged values to elegantly represent main MD properties at the conceptual 
level. We make use of the Object Constraint Language (OCL) to specify the 
constraints attached to the defined stereotypes, thereby avoiding an arbitrary 
use of these stereotypes. We have based our proposal in UML for two main 
reasons: 
(i) UML is a well known standard modeling language known by most 
database designers, thereby designers can avoid learning a new notation, 
and 
(ii) (ii) UML can be easily extended so that it can be tailored for a specific 
domain with concrete peculiarities such as the multidimensional modeling 
for data warehouses. Moreover, our proposal is Model Driven Architecture 
(MDA) compliant and we use the Query View Transformation (QVT) 
approach for an automatic generation of the implementation in a target 
platform. Throughout the talk, we will describe how to easily accomplish 
the MD modeling of DWs at the conceptual level. Furthermore, we will 
place this work in the whole framework, based on MDA, developed in the 
University of Alicante to accomplish the design, modeling and 
implementation of data warehouses. Finally, we will show hot to easily 
cover all the design stages of a data warehouse by using our overall 
framework. 
